Behind Bars: A Side-Channel Attack on NVIDIA MIG Cache Partitioning
Using Memory Barriers
Cheng Gu
University of Rochester
Reese Levine
UC Santa Cruz
Zhenkai Zhang
Clemson University
Tyler Sorensen
Microsoft and UC Santa Cruz
Yanan Guo
University of Rochester
Abstract
NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) is a feature designed
to enable isolation and secure multi-tenancy on large data
center GPUs. MIG partitions a single GPU into multiple in-
stances, each with dedicated hardware resources such as L2
cache slices. MIG is also documented to form the founda-
tion of NVIDIA’s confidential computing stack by providing
hardware-isolated trusted execution environments. However,
the security claims of MIG deserve closer investigation, espe-
cially given the complexity of the GPU memory system and
its many (sparsely documented) memory instructions.
In this work, we empirically examine the behavior of GPU
L2 cache with MIG enabled. We find that despite the par-
titioning design, cross-instance L2 cache interference still
occurs. Specifically, memory barriers (membars) generated
in one MIG instance have side effects that propagate across
L2 partitions and affect the timing of certain load operations
in other instances. We also find that these membars can be
triggered by specific GPU activities, such as kernel launches.
Building on these observations, we develop a new timing-
based side-channel attack in which an attacker in one MIG
instance can infer the kernel launch patterns of a victim in
another instance. We show that this attack compromises the
confidentiality of widely used GPU applications, such as large
language model inference, because kernel launch patterns in
these applications are correlated with sensitive information.
1 Introduction
The demand for GPU-accelerated computing continues to
grow, driven by advances in AI, data science, and high-
performance computing [1–3]. As a result, GPU data centers
are now a critical part of our computational infrastructure.
Due to the high cost of GPUs, both in terms of acquisition
and operation, providers must ensure high utilization for their
GPUs. A common method for improving hardware utilization
is multi-tenancy, where multiple users share the same phys-
ical resources. Multi-tenancy is particularly effective when
individual workloads cannot fully utilize the capabilities of
the hardware.
However, allowing multiple users to share a GPU intro-
duces performance and security concerns. For example, on
NVIDIA GPUs, the L2 cache is shared across all the compute
units. When workloads from different users execute in paral-
lel, contention in this shared cache can degrade performance
and bring opportunities for cache timing side-channel attacks
(a.k.a., cache attacks) [4–28].
To address these issues, NVIDIA introduced the Multi-
Instance GPU (MIG) feature starting with its Ampere-
generation data center GPUs (e.g., the A100) [29]. MIG en-
ables a single GPU to be partitioned into isolated instances,
each with its own dedicated compute and memory resources.
In particular, the L2 cache is partitioned between instances.
With the release of its next architecture, Hopper (e.g., the
H100), NVIDIA introduced the second generation of MIG, in-
tended to support its confidential computing framework [30].
This new MIG version still partitions the L2 cache and is
therefore documented to provide a trusted execution environ-
ment with cache side channels mitigated [31, Figure 6].
Given the increasingly critical role MIG plays, it is im-
portant to fully understand the extent of MIG’s hardware
isolation and its actual security guarantees—especially for
the second-generation MIG. Although several prior studies
have examined the security of MIG [32,33], they focused only
on the first-generation MIG and/or on hardware components
that MIG does not guarantee to protect (e.g., the PCIe bus).
In contrast, this paper focuses on the second-generation MIG
and on the security of the partitioned and supposedly pro-
tected L2 cache. Specifically, we aim to investigate whether
the L2 cache partitioning design in MIG is able to prevent all
cache attacks on NVIDIA GPUs.
We conduct a series of experiments on NVIDIA Hopper
GPUs with MIG enabled. Our results show that although
MIG physically partitions the L2 cache between instances,
cross-instance L2 cache interference still occurs. We find that
this interference is caused by memory barriers. Specifically,
when certain memory barrier requests are issued in one MIG
instance, the performance profiler (provided by NVIDIA)
running in another instance observes additional L2 cache re-
quests, namely, L2-level memory barrier requests (or membars
for short).
Triggering membars. On GPUs, membars are used to en-
force ordering of memory operations [34]. NVIDIA GPUs
provide a MEMBAR instruction; GPU programs can directly
execute this instruction to trigger membars. In addition, our
investigation reveals that certain program activities that invoke
GPU driver operations also trigger membars. These activi-
ties fall into three categories: 1) launching CUDA kernels,
2) calling certain CUDA memory management APIs, and 3)
creating or destroying CUDA contexts (i.e., processes).
Detecting membars across MIG instances. The above ob-
servation raises security concerns: the attacker in one MIG
instance can detect membars issued by the victim in another
instance simply by profiling the attacker’s workload. How-
ever, the profiler typically requires privileged access and is
entirely disabled in security-sensitive environments [31]. This
makes the profiling-based detection method less practical
for the attacker. To overcome this limitation, we investigate
whether the cross-instance effects of membars can be detected
through alternative means—specifically, timing. Since mem-
bars are used to guarantee memory ordering, it may affect
the execution time of memory instructions. Therefore, we
design a set of experiments to measure the execution time
of different memory instructions when membars are issued
in another MIG instance. Our results show that a specific an-
notated load instruction, LD.STRONG.GPU, consistently runs
slower in the presence of membars. This means that, instead
of relying on the profiler, the attacker could detect membars
issued in a separate MIG instance by measuring the latency
of LD.STRONG.GPU.
Covert channels. Based on the above findings, we develop
a new timing-based covert channel, Membar+Load, which
operates across MIG instances. The sender in one instance
transmits a bit by either repeatedly issuing membars (to send a
“1”) or remaining idle (to send a “0”). To issue membars, the
sender can either directly execute the MEMBAR instruction or
invoke one of the membar-generating activities (e.g., launch-
ing kernels). The receiver in another instance receives the bit
by timing the execution of the LD.STRONG.GPU instruction:
longer execution time indicates a bit “1” and shorter execution
time indicates a bit “0”.
Side-channel attacks. We then show that Membar+Load
can also be exploited as a side-channel attack. As explained
above, membars can be triggered either by directly executing
the MEMBAR instruction or through one of the three membar-
generating activities. In practice, we find that common GPU
applications, such as machine learning applications, rarely
execute the MEMBAR instruction directly. In addition, among
the three types of membar-generating activities, GPU appli-
cations do not often call the CUDA memory management
APIs or create/destroy CUDA contexts; however, they very
frequently launch CUDA kernels. Moreover, the kernel launch
patterns often reflect sensitive application information. There-
fore, using Membar+Load, the attacker can detect the kernel
launches in the victim workload and infer private information
correlated with the kernel launch patterns.
Building on this insight, we demonstrate side-channel at-
tacks on two GPU applications. In the first attack, we target
large language model (LLM) inference. We show that differ-
ent LLMs exhibit different kernel launch patterns. Therefore,
the attacker can use Membar+Load to fingerprint the LLM in
use. Moreover, given a specific LLM, the two primary phases
of the inference process—prefill and decode—also exhibit
distinct kernel launch patterns. By separating these phases, the
attacker can estimate their durations and infer the number of
input and output tokens, which correlate with these durations.
This information can further reveal characteristics of the in-
ference, such as the topic of the task. In the second attack, we
target a different domain: graph processing. We show that the
kernel launch pattern of a graph processing workload varies
depending on the input graph. Therefore, the attacker can
fingerprint the graph being processed from a set of candidates
by detecting the kernel launches using Membar+Load. To
the best of our knowledge, Membar+Load is the first cache
attack method that works across MIG instances.
Responsible disclosure. We disclosed our findings to
NVIDIA on June 30, 2025. NVIDIA acknowledged our re-
port and requested a three-month embargo on July 25, and
lifted the embargo on October 13. In addition, AMD MI300X
GPUs feature a design called Core Partitioned X-celerator
(CPX), which is similar to NVIDIA’s MIG. Although we were
unable to test CPX due to lack of access to AMD GPUs, we
disclosed our findings to AMD as well.
2 Background
In this section, we provide background information on GPUs
and cache attacks. We focus on NVIDIA GPUs, since the goal
of this work is to develop cache attacks that bypass the cache
partitioning design on these GPUs.
2.1 GPU Architecture and Programming
GPU architecture. GPUs are designed to handle highly par-
allel workloads efficiently. The basic compute units in a GPU
are called streaming multiprocessors (SMs). Each SM con-
tains an array of simple cores and can execute a group of 32
threads—known as a warp—in an SIMT (single-instruction,
multiple-thread) fashion. A GPU includes many SMs that
operate in parallel to support massive thread-level parallelism.
For example, NVIDIA H100, one of the latest server-grade
GPUs, contains 132 SMs.
CPU/
DRAM
Compute 
Units
L1 CacheL1 Cache
Core
L1
Cache
SM Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 CacheL1
Cache
L1
Cache
SM Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 CacheL1
Cache
L1
Cache
SM
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
Crossbar
DRAM DRAM DRAM
...
...
Instance 0 Instance 1 Instance n
CPU/
DRAM
GPU
Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
CPU/
DRAM
Compute 
Units
L1 CacheL1 Cache
Core
L1
Cache
SM Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 CacheL1
Cache
L1
Cache
SM Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 Cache
Compute 
Units
L1 CacheL1
Cache
L1
Cache
SM
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
L2 Cache 
slices
Crossbar
DRAM DRAM DRAM
...
...
Instance 0 Instance 1 Instance n
CPU/
DRAM
GPU
Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Core Core
Figure 1: Overview of NVIDIA GPU architecture with MIG.
GPUs usually use their own on-board memory to store data
and program state. This memory typically uses special DRAM
technologies that are designed to achieve high bandwidth,
such as HBM. GPU memory is often referred to as device
memory; it has its own management mechanism and operates
independently from the main memory (on the CPU side).
When needed, data can be transferred between CPU and GPU
memory over the PCIe bus.
The latency of accessing GPU memory is very high—much
higher than that of main memory. To reduce the impact of
this significant latency and improve performance, modern
GPUs typically use a two-level cache hierarchy. Specifically,
each SM has its own private data and instruction caches, and
all the SMs share the L2 cache (i.e., the last-level cache).
According to prior studies [35, 36], both L1 and L2 caches
are set-associative; in addition, the L2 cache is non-inclusive
of the L1 and is organized into slices. As on CPUs, accessing
the L2 cache on GPUs is much faster than accessing the GPU
memory but slower than accessing the L1 cache.
GPU programming & kernel execution. GPUs were orig-
inally designed to accelerate graphics rendering and could
only be programmed using graphics-specific APIs, such as
OpenGL [37] and DirectX [38]. However, modern GPUs have
evolved to handle a wide range of non-graphics tasks, such
as deep learning and scientific computing, and they can now
be programmed through general-purpose GPU programming
interfaces, such as CUDA [39] (for NVIDIA GPUs).
In CUDA, GPU tasks are written as kernels, which are spe-
cial functions launched from the CPU but executed on the
GPU. To launch a kernel, the CPU program calls the kernel
function using a special syntax that specifies the number of
thread blocks and the number of threads per block. The CUDA
runtime forwards this request to the GPU driver, which then
sets up the execution of the thread blocks on the GPU. In
a typical CUDA program, before launching a kernel, it first
allocates memory on the GPU (e.g., using cudaMalloc) and
copies the required data from main memory to device memory
(e.g., using cudaMemcpy). After executing one or more ker-
nels, the program copies the results back to main memory, and
releases the allocated device memory (e.g., using cudaFree).
GPU context & GPU sharing. A GPU context is concep-
tually similar to a CPU process: every CUDA program runs
within a context on the GPU, and the context provides isola-
tion between different programs [40]. A context is typically
created implicitly when the program first interacts with GPU—
for example, by calling CUDA APIs like cudaMalloc. Al-
ternatively, it can be created explicitly using low-level driver
calls. On NVIDIA GPUs, multiple contexts time-share the
GPU by default: a hardware scheduler inside the GPU multi-
plexes their execution by allocating each context a time slice.
However, when advanced features such as Multi-Instance
GPU (discussed later) are enabled, contexts can run in paral-
lel on the GPU.
GPU Instruction Set Architecture (ISA). NVIDIA defines
two layers of ISAs for its GPUs. PTX is a virtual ISA that
provides a stable interface across different GPU generations.
SASS is the native ISA, which is specific to each GPU archi-
tecture. When compiling CUDA code, the code is first trans-
lated into PTX, which is then further compiled into SASS
instructions that execute directly on the hardware. Unlike
PTX, which is open and well-documented, SASS is a closed,
proprietary ISA.
2.2 NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU
Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) is a feature introduced by
NVIDIA with the A100 GPUs in 2020. It is designed to im-
prove GPU resource utilization and isolation in multi-tenant
environments. MIG allows a single GPU to be partitioned
into multiple independent instances,1 and workloads can run
in parallel in different instances. As shown in Figure 1, each
instance has its own compute resources (SMs). In addition,
each instance is allocated a dedicated set of memory-system
resources, including on-chip crossbar ports, L2 cache slices,
memory controllers, and DRAM channels. This hardware
partitioning is intended to prevent interference between work-
loads in different instances and therefore ensures that they
can run in parallel with both predictable performance and
security.
In 2022, with the release of H100 GPUs, NVIDIA intro-
duced the second-generation MIG [30]. Beyond hardware par-
titioning, this second-generation design includes additional
hardware features to support NVIDIA’s confidential comput-
ing (CC) technology. NVIDIA CC ensures that each confi-
dential virtual machine is provided with a hardware-isolated
trusted execution environment (TEE). Without MIG, a TEE
must occupy an entire GPU (or multiple GPUs), which limits
1Depending on the GPU, there can be up to four or seven instances.
Table 1: Platform details.
CPU 2 × Intel Xeon Gold 6526Y
GPU 1 × NVIDIA H100 PCIe
GPU L2 cache 50 MB, 16-way associative
GPU memory 80 GB
Max number of MIG instances 7
Operating system Ubuntu 22.04.4
GPU driver version 560.35.03
CUDA version 12.6
GPU DVFS Enabled
the GPU resource utilization. However, with MIG enabled, a
TEE can be assigned to just a single MIG instance instead of
the whole GPU, significantly improving efficiency. With these
hardware-isolated TEEs, NVIDIA claims that cache attacks
have been mitigated in their CC solution [31, Figure 6].
Note that the driver support for NVIDIA CC is still in
its early stages. The drivers for single-GPU CC and multi-
GPU CC were released in February 2024 and February 2025,
respectively [41]. As of this writing, NVIDIA has not yet
released the driver for MIG+CC, and therefore we cannot
examine MIG with CC enabled. However, according to the
white paper for NVIDIA CC [31], MIG+CC is one of the
official CC configurations.
2.3 GPU Cache Attacks
Cache attacks have been extensively studied on CPUs. Most
cache attacks are based on cache evictions. For example, in
Prime+Probe [7], the attacker first fills specific cache sets
with its own cache lines. Then, the attacker detects the vic-
tim’s accesses in these sets by observing evictions of the
attacker’s cache lines. More recently, researchers have shown
that eviction-based cache attacks such as Prime+Probe are
also feasible on GPUs [35, 36]. However, these attacks have
only been demonstrated without MIG; with MIG enabled, the
attacker and victim no longer share any cache sets if they are
running in different instances.
3 Goal of Behind Bars
As explained in Section 2.2, with MIG enabled, each instance
on the GPU is assigned a separate L2 partition, i.e., a distinct
group of L2 cache slices. Based on this, NVIDIA claims
that workloads running in different MIG instances do not
interfere with each other at the L2 cache level [29, 30], and
thus cache attacks are mitigated [31]. The goal of this work is
to examine the extent of this mitigation—specifically, whether
cross-instance L2 cache interference can still occur under
the partitioning design and lead to security concerns. This
investigation is critical since MIG has become a key feature
in modern GPUs:
First, MIG plays an important role in multi-tenant GPU
environments, since it introduces hardware-enforced isola-
tion that provides both performance and security benefits for
GPU applications. Second, the significance of MIG is fur-
ther amplified in NVIDIA CC: the second-generation MIG is
specifically designed to provide hardware-isolated TEEs to
support NVIDIA CC (although the driver for MIG+CC has
not yet been released, cf. Section 2.2).
4 Characterization of MIG L2 Cache Isolation
In this section, we conduct experiments to examine the L2
partitioning design in MIG on NVIDIA GPUs. The physical
L2 cache partitioning design in MIG makes cross-instance
L2 cache evictions theoretically infeasible, and we have em-
pirically verified this in Appendix A. However, other forms
of cross-instance interference may still occur. For example,
the execution of certain memory instructions may have side
effects that span across L2 partitions and influence memory
instructions issued in other instances. Therefore, we focus on
identifying and analyzing such interference.
In this section, we present only the experiments performed
on the system specified in Table 1. This system features an
NVIDIA H100 GPU, which is the first GPU to support the
second-generation MIG design. However, we have also tested
all our findings on other systems (with different GPUs and
drivers), and the results are discussed in Section 7.
4.1 Cross-Instance Cache Interference
We start our investigation using NVIDIA Nsight Com-
pute [42], which is the official CUDA profiler from NVIDIA.
This profiler collects detailed performance data for each indi-
vidual CUDA kernel execution using hardware performance
counters. This data provides rich information about the ker-
nel’s L2 cache activities—such as the overall L2 hit/miss rates
and the total number of L2 cache requests—which may reveal
signs of potential cross-instance interference in the L2 cache.
Experiments. To detect cross-instance L2 cache interference,
we profile the L2 cache behavior of a simple GPU program
(the detector) in one MIG instance, while a workload with
various GPU activities (the stressor) is running in another
instance. We then compare the profiling results to those col-
lected without the stressor.
Specifically, we create two MIG instances, Ins0 for the
detector and Ins1 for the stressor. The detector launches a
simple single-threaded CUDA kernel that consists of a counter
loop. The code for this kernel is shown in Listing 1: it incre-
ments a counter by one in each loop iteration. We profile this
detector kernel and collect the metrics related to L2 cache
requests. The detector kernel itself should generate only a
minimal number of L2 requests (since it is only accessing two
1 __global__ void detector(uint64_t NUM_ROUND){
2 uint64_t cnt = 0;
3 while (cnt++ < NUM_ROUND){}
4 }
Listing 1: The detector kernel.
variables); if the profiler reports otherwise, it may indicate
interference from the stressor.
For the stressor, we test both user-level and driver-level
GPU activities that can potentially cause L2 cache interfer-
ence across instances. First, for user-level activities, the stres-
sor consists of a long-running CUDA kernel that repeatedly
issues data accesses using the LD, ST, or ATOM (for atomic)
SASS instructions. These accesses are designed to miss in the
local L1 cache and are therefore served by the L2 cache (we
cover both L2 hits and misses).
Second, for driver-level activities, we test a range of com-
mon program behaviors that invoke driver routines and may
implicitly trigger cache requests on the GPU. These behaviors
cover all typical interactions with the GPU driver in real-world
applications, including launching CUDA kernels, managing
CUDA memory (via APIs such as cudaMalloc), and con-
trolling CUDA execution flow (e.g., events and contexts, cf.
Section 2.1).
Results. We find that none of the tested user-level activities—
via the LD, ST, and ATOM instructions—have any observable
impact on the profiling results. However, several driver-level
activities substantially affect the profiling results, in particular,
the value reported by the metric lts__t_requests. This
metric reports the total number of L2 requests2 generated by
a CUDA kernel during its execution. We find that compared
to when no stressor is running, three types of driver-level
stressor activities cause a significant increase in the number
of L2 requests recorded by the profiler for the detector kernel:
1) Launching CUDA kernels.
2) Calling cudaFree, cudaMemcpy, or cudaMemset APIs.3
3) Creating or destroying CUDA contexts. Note that creating
and destroying contexts both affect the profiling results to
a similar extent, so we discuss them together.
The specific number of L2 requests reported by the pro-
filer under each of the above stressor activities is shown
in Figure 2(a). Note that in our experiments, the kernel
launch stressor uses a simple single-threaded kernel, while
the cudaFree/cudaMemset/cudaMemcpy stressors all use a
small 16B buffer.
One natural question here is where these additional L2
requests come from. To answer this, we further examine
2The prefix lts is used for all the metrics at the L2 cache level.
3Variants of these APIs (e.g., cudaMemcpyAsync) have the same effect.
43k39k35k32k4k2kKernel LaunchcudaFreecudaMemsetcudaMemcpyCxt Crea./Des.No Stressor0 20k 40k 60k 80k
(a) Total L2 requests.
42k38k34k31k2k1kKernel LaunchcudaFreecudaMemsetcudaMemcpyCxt Crea./Des.No Stressor0 20k 40k 60k 80kGPU-widesys-wide (b) L2 memory barrier requests.
Figure 2: The profiling results for the detector kernel under
multiple stressors: (a) the total number of L2 requests; (b) the
number of L2 memory barrier requests. For (b), we also show
the breakdown: GPU-wide vs. system-wide memory barrier
requests.
the categories of these L2 requests: in addition to report-
ing the total number of L2 requests across all types, the pro-
filer also reports the number of requests for each individual
type (e.g., lts__t_requests_op_load for L2 load requests
and lts__t_requests_op_store for L2 store requests). We
find that almost all these additional L2 requests caused by the
stressor fall into one specific type: L2-level memory barrier
requests (with the metriclts__t_requests_op_membar), as
shown in Figure 2(b).4
The profiler also provides a breakdown of these memory
barrier requests based on their scope: GPU-wide vs. system-
wide. We find that different stressor activities trigger memory
barrier requests of different scopes, as shown in Figure 2(b).
For example, launching kernels issues both GPU-wide and
system-wide memory barrier requests, but calling cudaFree
triggers only system-wide memory barrier requests.
Note that the scope of a memory barrier request determines
the cache level it affects (e.g., L1 vs. L2, explained further
in Section 4.2). However, the profiler only reports memory
barrier requests that take effect at the L2 level, namely the
GPU-wide and system-wide memory barrier requests. For
clarity and brevity, we refer to memory barrier requests simply
as memory barriers or membars throughout the rest of this
paper. In addition, all mentions of membars assume the L2
level unless stated otherwise.
What are membars? On modern GPUs, membars are special
instructions that enforce ordering between memory opera-
tions issued before and after the membar. They are also called
fences on some architectures. The precise semantics of mem-
bars have been explored in prior studies [34, 43]. NVIDIA
GPUs feature a MEMBAR instruction in their SASS ISA; it
supports several suffixes, including a scope qualifier (i.e.,
MEMBAR.SCOPE). This instruction ensures that all memory
operations issued before the membar (by the current thread)
complete within the scope defined by the qualifier before any
4For the stressor that creates and destroys CUDA contexts, we also ob-
serve a slight additional increase in load/store requests that miss in the L2
cache. The details are explained in Appendix A.
subsequent memory operations are executed.
According to NVIDIA [44], the scope qualifier of the
MEMBAR instruction can take the values CTA (for thread
block), GPU, or SYS (for system). However, using NVIDIA’s
cuobjdump utility from the CUDA toolkit, we discover two
additional scope values: SM and VC. Empirically, we find that
SM behaves similarly to CTA, and VC behaves similarly to GPU
(Appendix B). Therefore, we omit these two scopes from the
rest of the discussion.
Why do the activities in another instance affect the number
of membars observed by the profiler? The profiling results
in Figure 2 are very surprising: the profiler is configured
to monitor only the detector kernel; however, the number
of the reported membars varies significantly depending on
the stressor activities in a separate MIG instance. With the
hardware isolation promised by MIG, such cross-instance
effects should not occur.
We hypothesize that the GPU driver operations triggered
by these stressor activities (such as kernel launches) intrin-
sically issue the MEMBAR instructions on the GPU, and these
instructions have effects that bypass MIG boundaries. Specif-
ically, these instructions trigger certain predefined L2-level
operations in the L2 partitions of all MIG instances on the
GPU. The hardware performance counters used by the profiler
capture these operations, and the profiler incorrectly attributes
them to the kernel that is being profiled at the time (in our
case, the detector kernel). We provide concrete experimental
evidence supporting this hypothesis in Section 4.2.
Takeaway 1: Launching CUDA kernels, calling cer-
tain CUDA memory management APIs, and creat-
ing/destroying CUDA contexts in one MIG instance
can cause the profiler in another instance to observe
additional membars.
4.2 Cross-Instance Membars
In this section, we conduct experiments to further analyze
why certain GPU activities in one MIG instance cause the
profiler in another instance to report additional membars. As
explained earlier, we suspect this occurs because these activi-
ties lead to the execution of the MEMBAR instructions. To test
this hypothesis, we examine whether a CUDA kernel that ex-
plicitly executes these instructions produces the same effects
on the profiling results in another MIG instance.
Experiments. Similar to the experiments in Section 4.1, we
run the detector (with the profiler) in Ins0 and the stressor in
Ins1. The detector is the same as the one used in Section 4.1:
it runs a CUDA kernel consisting of a counter loop. However,
the stressor is different: the stressor now directly executes a
CUDA kernel that repeatedly issues the MEMBAR instruction
with one of the three scopes ( CTA, GPU, or SYS). Listing 2
shows an example of the stressor code. In addition, we vary
1 __global__ void stressor(){
2 while (1){ asm volatile("membar.sys;":::"memory"); }
3 }
Listing 2: The stressor code with theMEMBAR.SYS loop. Note
that the PTX-level instruction in the code will be compiled
into the SASS-level MEMBAR.SYS instruction.
Table 2: The profiling results for the detector kernel; each
reported value is the average of 1K runs.
Stressor Threads GPU-wide Sys-wide Total
membars membars membars
None N/A < 1K < 1K < 1K
MEMBAR.CTA
128 < 1K < 1K < 1K
256 < 1K < 1K < 1K
512 < 1K < 1K < 1K
1024 < 1K < 1K < 1K
MEMBAR.SYS
128 < 1K 32K 32K
256 < 1K 61K 61K
512 < 1K 103K 103K
1024 < 1K 104K 104K
MEMBAR.GPU
128 56K < 1K 56K
256 111K < 1K 112K
512 194K < 1K 194K
1024 194K < 1K 194K
the number of threads used in the stressor to study how the
density of the MEMBAR instructions affects the profiling results;
using more threads likely causes more MEMBAR instructions to
be issued in parallel.
The profiling results for the detector are shown in Table 2; we
have two important observations from this table:
Observation 1. First, compared to the baseline with no stres-
sor, a stressor executing MEMBAR.GPU or MEMBAR.SYS causes
an increase in the total number of membars reported by the
profiler. Specifically, the stressor withMEMBAR.GPU increases
the number of GPU-wide membars, while the stressor with
MEMBAR.SYS increases the number of system-wide membars.
In contrast, a stressor executing MEMBAR.CTA shows no cross-
instance impact on the profiling results, as this narrower-scope
membar likely does not trigger global L2 operations and is
thus not captured by the profiler in a separate instance.
Based on this observation, we believe it is very
likely that the three types of GPU activities discussed
in Section 4.1—namely, launching CUDA kernels,
calling certain CUDA memory management APIs
(cudaFree/cudaMemcpy/cudaMemset), and creating/destroy-
ing CUDA contexts—intrinsically issue the MEMBAR.GPU
or MEMBAR.SYS instructions. These instructions then affect
the profiling results in other MIG instances. In the rest of
this paper, we refer to these three types of GPU activities as
membar-generating activities.
Observation 2. From Table 2, for a stressor that exe-
cutes MEMBAR.GPU or MEMBAR.SYS, increasing the number
of threads in the stressor initially causes the profiler to report
more membars. This is because using more threads could
lead to a higher density of issued membars. However, this
effect eventually reaches a limit: once the number of threads
exceeds 512, further increasing the number of threads does
not significantly raise the number of membars reported by the
profiler, which is likely due to the limited hardware resources
on the GPU (to process membars).
An immediate question here is whether changing the pa-
rameters of membar-generating activities changes the mem-
bar density. For example, does increasing the number of
threads in the launched kernels or increasing the buffer size in
cudaMemset calls causes more membars to be generated? To
answer this question, we run a stressor in one MIG instance
that executes one of these membar-generating activities with
varying parameters; at the same time, we profile a detector
kernel (the same as the one used earlier) in another instance.
We find that modifying these parameters, such as the number
of threads in the launched kernels, does not cause any changes
in the number of profiled membars (as long as the activities
are issued at the same frequency, explained next).
However, the frequency of these activities affects the num-
ber of profiled membars. For example, for the stressor that
repeatedly launches kernels, inserting some waiting time be-
tween consecutive launches reduces the number of membars
reported by the profiler. Figure 3 shows the number of pro-
filed membars with different waiting times added between
consecutive kernel launches: a longer waiting time results in
a lower membar density and thus fewer profiled membars. We
observe the same trend for other membar-generating activities
as well. Note that in the experiments of Section 4.1, no wait-
ing time is added between consecutive iterations of activities
such as kernel launches; each launch occurs immediately after
the previous one finishes.
Takeaway 2: Membar-generating activities trigger the
MEMBAR.GPU or MEMBAR.SYS instructions, which af-
fect the profiling results on membars in other MIG
instances. In addition, a higher membar density could
lead to a greater effect.
4.3 Membar Detection
The findings in the previous sections have security implica-
tions: an attacker in one MIG instance can potentially detect
the membars issued by a victim in another instance by moni-
toring the cross-instance effects of membars. In earlier sec-
tions, we relied on the profiler for this monitoring. However,
the profiler requires privileged access and istypically disabled
in security-sensitive scenarios such as confidential computing
environments. Therefore, in this section, we explore alter-
0 10 20 30 40 50020k40k60k# of MembarsWaiting Time (µs) Total GPU-wide System-wide
Figure 3: The profiling results on membars with varying
waiting times inserted after each kernel launch in the kernel-
launch stressor.
native methods to detect the cross-instance membar effects.
Specifically, we focus on leveraging timing information, i.e.,
we study whether membars issued in one instance affect the
latency of operations in another instance.
4.3.1 Impact on Load/Store Timing
As explained in Section 4.1, the purpose of membars is to
enforce ordering of memory operations. Therefore, the mem-
bars issued in one MIG instance may affect the latency of
load and store operations in another instance.
To test this hypothesis, we again run an experiment with
two MIG instances. The detector in Ins0 and the stressor in
Ins1 each launches a CUDA kernel (with a varying number
of threads, explained next). Each thread in the stressor kernel
repeatedly issues the MEMBAR.GPU or MEMBAR.SYS instruc-
tions. Each thread in the detector kernel repeatedly measures
the execution time of the LD or ST instructions.5 Note that
when the detector runs multiple threads, it collects multiple
execution-time samples in each measurement round, and we
report only the average across all threads for each round.
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the timing im-
pact introduced by membars, we repeat the experiments with
different numbers of threads in both the stressor and the detec-
tor. In addition, we flush the L1 and/or L2 caches after each
round of measurement in the detector, in order to study the
impact of membars on the execution time of the LD/ST in-
structions that access data from different levels of the memory
hierarchy (e.g., L2 cache vs. device memory).
Results. We find that 1) the effect the stressor has on the
latency of the detector’sLD/ST instructions, and 2) the mag-
nitude of that effect, both depend on the configurations of the
detector and the stressor, which we discuss in detail below.
Detector configuration. We observe that, compared to the
baseline without a stressor, having a stressor increases the
execution time of the detector’s LD/ST instructions only if
the detector is running a large number of threads in parallel,
i.e., issuing a large number of load/store operations in parallel.
Specifically, when the detector runs about 1K threads, there
is an observable increase in the execution time of its LD/ST
5The instructions in different threads target different addresses.
Table 3: The increase in the latency of executing LD/ST when
different stressors (with different membar loops and different
numbers of threads) are running in a separate instance; each
value is the average of 1K iterations.
Stressor Detector (12K Threads)
Instruction # of Threads LD Latency ↑ ST Latency ↑
MEMBAR.SYS
128 0.4% < 0.1%
256 1.0% < 0.1%
512 1.7% < 0.1%
1024 1.7% < 0.1%
MEMBAR.GPU
128 0.8% < 0.1%
256 1.8% < 0.1%
512 3.2% < 0.1%
1024 3.2% < 0.1%
instructions (with the stressor). Raising the number of threads
in the detector from 1K to 12K results in a slightly larger
timing increase. However, beyond this point,6 further raising
the number of threads leads to a small reduction in the timing
increase. In addition, the timing increase is larger when the
detector’sLD/ST instructions hit in the L2 cache than when
they miss. Therefore, in the following paragraphs, we focus
on discussing the results where the detector runs 12K threads
and all of its LD/ST instructions hit in the L2 cache.
Stressor configuration. Table 3 shows the increase in the ex-
ecution time of the detector’sLD/ST instructions when there
is a stressor; each result is averaged over 1K iterations. We
fix the number of threads in the detector to 12K (as explained
above), and vary only the number of threads in the stressor.
The results show that the stressor (across all tested configura-
tions) causes an observable increase in the average execution
time of the detector’sLD instructions. In addition, raising the
number of threads in the stressor initially leads to greater
timing increases due to a higher density of membars. How-
ever, the impact eventually reaches a peak—further raising the
number of threads does not result in greater timing increases.
This trend matches the one shown in Table 2. Note that the
stressor also increases the average execution time of the de-
tector’sST instructions, as shown in Table 3, but this effect is
much less observable than the effect for the LD instructions.
Takeaway 3: Membars issued in one MIG instance
increase the average execution time of the LD instruc-
tions in another instance when there are a large num-
ber of LD instructions issued in parallel. A higher
membar density can lead to a greater timing impact.
Now, to understand how the membar-generating activities
affect the latency of executing the LD/ST instructions, we
6This value depends on the available hardware resources in the MIG
instance. We use a 1g,10g MIG instance for the detector in our experiments.
Table 4: The increase in the latency of executing LD/ST when
different stressors (with different GPU activities) are running
in a separate instance; each value is the average of 1K itera-
tions.
Stressor LD Latency ↑ ST Latency ↑
Launching kernels 0.6% < 0.1%
Calling cudaFree 0.6% < 0.1%
Calling cudaMemcpy 0.5% < 0.1%
Calling cudaMemset 0.5% < 0.1%
Crea./destr. CUDA contexts < 0.1% < 0.1%
re-run the experiments in Table 3 with the same detector
setup; but we change the stressor from directly executing the
MEMBAR.GPU/MEMBAR.SYS instructions to implicitly issuing
membars through one of the membar-generating activities.
We first run the experiments with the membar-generating
activities issued in a tight loop, with no waiting time inserted
between consecutive iterations (cf. Section 4.2). The results,
as shown in Table 4, indicate that these activities noticeably
increase the average latency of executing the LD instructions
in the detector, but the increases here are slightly smaller than
those in Table 3.
We then run the experiments while varying the frequency
of these activities by inserting waiting time in the stressor. The
results show that changing the frequency of the activities alters
the magnitude of the timing effect. For example, Figure 4
shows the latency increase for the detector’sLD instructions
when the stressor repeatedly launches kernels with different
waiting times between consecutive launches. A longer waiting
time results in a smaller latency increase, which is consistent
with the observation in Figure 3.
0 10 20 30 40 500.00.20.40.60.8Latency Increase (%)Waiting Time (µs)
Figure 4: The increase in the latency of executing LD with
varying waiting times added after each kernel launch in the
kernel launch stressor.
4.3.2 Detecting Membars Using Timing Information
Although Table 3 and Table 4 show that theaverage latency
of the LD instructions increases when membars are issued by
the stressor, we find that the individual latency measurements
are not very stable. Figure 5(a) shows the raw latency samples
of the LD instructions from 500 iterations, both with and with-
out the stressor. While the average values in the two cases
0 100 200 300 400 50013401360138014001420 No Stressor With StressorLatency (Cycles)Iteration ID
(a) LD latency.
0 100 200 300 400 50015401560158016001620 No Stressor With StressorLatency (Cycles)Iteration ID (b) LD.STRONG.GPU latency.
Figure 5: The latency of (a) LD and (b) LD.STRONG.GPU, mea-
sured over 500 iterations with and without the kernel-launch
stressor; values are reported in GPU cycles.
Table 5: The increase in the latency of executing
LD.STRONG.GPU/ST.STRONG.GPU when different stressors
(with different GPU activities) are running in a separate in-
stance; each value is the average of 1K iterations.
Stressor LD Latency ↑ ST Latency ↑
Launching kernels 0.7% < 0.1%
Calling cudaFree 0.7% < 0.1%
Calling cudaMemcpy 0.5% < 0.1%
Calling cudaMemset 0.5% < 0.1%
Crea./destr. CUDA contexts < 0.1% < 0.1%
are clearly different, the individual measurements partially
overlap. This overlap significantly limits the attacker’s ability
to reliably use this timing signal to detect membars issued in
another instance.
How to reliably detect GPU activities in a different instance?
By examining a large amount of NVIDIA library assembly
code, we find that, in addition to the regular LD and ST in-
structions, NVIDIA also provides the LD.STRONG.GPU and
ST.STRONG.GPU instructions. We could not find any official
documentation describing the exact semantics of these instruc-
tions. However, we believe these instructions are designed
to enforce stronger ordering guarantees, based on several
observations from our experiments. For example, we find
that PTX-level memory operations that are annotated with
ordering qualifiers are all compiled to the LD.STRONG.GPU
and ST.STRONG.GPU instructions. Other observations are pro-
vided in Appendix C.
To understand if the latency of executing these instructions
is affected by membars, we conduct the same experiments as
in Table 4, but use LD.STRONG.GPU and ST.STRONG.GPU in-
stead of LD and ST. The results are shown in Table 5. We
find that similar to the case with LD, membars in one in-
stance cause an observable increase in the latency of executing
LD.STRONG.GPU in another instance.
More importantly, we find that the latency of executing
LD.STRONG.GPU is much more stable than that of LD. As
shown in Figure 5(b), for LD.STRONG.GPU, there is a clear
separation between the latency samples collected with and
without the stressor. Therefore, by measuring the execution
time of LD.STRONG.GPU, an attacker can more reliably detect
membars in another MIG instance and construct powerful
covert channels and side-channel attacks. We demonstrate
these later in Section 5 and Section 6.
Takeaway 4: Compared to LD, the execution time of
LD.STRONG.GPU can be used to detect the membars
issued in a separate MIG instance with significantly
higher precision.
4.3.3 Impact on Timing of Other Instructions
We have also tested the impact of membars on the execution
time of other memory-related instructions, such as MEMBAR
and ATOM. We find that, similar to the case withLD, the average
execution time of these instructions also slightly increases
when a stressor is present, but the increases in individual
measurements are not stable and therefore cannot be used to
reliably detect membars.
4.4 Summary
To summarize, in this section we demonstrated that membars,
which are a specific type of L2 cache requests, have effects
across MIG instances on NVIDIA GPUs. Specifically, we
observed the following properties of membars:
1) A CUDA program can issue membars either by
directly executing the MEMBAR.GPU or MEMBAR.SYS
instructions or by having one of those membar-
generating activities, namely launching CUDA kernels,
calling cudaFree/cudaMemset/cudaMemcpy, and creat-
ing/destroying CUDA contexts.
2) Membars issued in one MIG instance can be observed in
another instance, either through the profiler or by measur-
ing the execution time of LD.STRONG.GPU.
These observations are important because traditional
eviction-based cache attacks such as Prime+Probe are no
longer practical when MIG is enabled, as experimentally ver-
ified in Appendix A. However, these membar-based effects
can enable a new class of cache attacks. In the next two sec-
tions, we show how our observations on membars can be
exploited to build powerful cross-instance covert channels
and side-channel attacks.
5 Covert Channel
The reverse-engineering results from Section 4 can be used to
build a timing-based cross-instance covert channel. In this sec-
tion, we first introduce the threat model, and then we explain
the details of the covert channel. This covert channel also
serves as a primitive for the side-channel attacks discussed
later in Section 6.
5.1 Threat Model
We assume that the two key participants in the covert channel,
the sender and the receiver, are unprivileged users running
on the same system equipped with an NVIDIA GPU that
has MIG enabled. The sender and the receiver are assigned to
different MIG instances and can launch CUDA kernels only in
their respective instances. We also assume that both the sender
and the receiver can access processor timing information, such
as the CLOCK register on the GPU. 7 In addition, the sender
and the receiver agree on predefined channel protocols, such
as the synchronization protocol. Importantly, the sender and
the receiver do not need to share any data or CPU hardware
resources; for example, they can run on different cores of a
CPU, or even on different CPUs in a multi-CPU system.
5.2 Membar+Load
As explained in Section 4.3, the membars issued in one MIG
instance affect the latency of theLD.STRONG.GPU instructions
in another instance. Based on this timing effect, we develop
a new covert channel named Membar+Load; the detailed
channel protocol and its performance are described below.
Channel protocol. In Membar+Load, the sender sends one
bit of information in each iteration during the transmission
period. To send a bit “1”, it repeatedly issues membars in
its MIG instance. To send a bit “0”, it does not issue any
membars. The receiver receives the bit by issuing a large
number of the LD.STRONG.GPU instructions in parallel and
measuring their execution time: if it takes longer to execute
these instructions, the receiver receives a “1”; otherwise the
receiver receives a “0”.
Channel implementation. There are multiple ways to im-
plement Membar+Load, particularly in how the sender issues
membars: the sender can issue membars either by directly exe-
cuting MEMBAR.GPU/MEMBAR.SYS, or by triggering one of the
membar-generating activities. In our implementation, we use
the latter approach. Specifically, the sender triggers membars
by launching CUDA kernels. We choose this option because it
has a high potential to be exploited as a side-channel attack—
many GPU applications frequently launch CUDA kernels
(further explained in Section 6).
7Note that CLOCK is a user-level register, similar to TSC on CPUs.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100155015601570158015901600Latency (Cycles)Time (ms)
Figure 6: An example raw timing trace collected by the
receiver in Membar+Load, when the sender is sending
“0101010101”; the transmission interval is 10ms.
0 1 2 3 40.00.51.01.52.0Raw Transmission Rate (Kb/s)Channel Capacity (Kb/s)010203040Error Rate (%)
Figure 7: The channel capacities and error rates of Mem-
bar+Load.
Evaluation. We implemented a prototype of Membar+Load
and tested it on the H100 GPU system specified in Table 1.
Figure 6 shows an example of sending “0101010101” through
this channel. To evaluate this channel, we use the metricchan-
nel capacity (as in prior work [45,46]) to quantify the channel
throughput. It is calculated by multiplying the raw transmis-
sion rate by (1 − H(e)), where e is the bit error rate and H
is the binary entropy function. Figure 7 shows the channel
capacities and bit error rates under different raw transmis-
sion rates (i.e., different transmission intervals). The channel
capacity peaks at 1.57 Kb/s.
6 Side-Channel Attacks
In this section, we demonstrate that Membar+Load can be
exploited for side-channel attacks across MIG instances.
Specifically, by monitoring the latency of LD.STRONG.GPU,
the attacker can detect membars issued by the victim
in another instance. As explained earlier, these membars
are issued either because the victim directly executes
MEMBAR.GPU/MEMBAR.SYS, or because the victim triggers
membar-generating activities. We find that, first of all, most
GPU applications rarely use these instructions directly (for
example, see a survey of kernels in prior work [47]). Sec-
ond, among the three types of membar-generating activi-
ties, launching kernels occurs much more frequently than
calling cudaFree/cudaMemset/cudaMemcpy and creating/de-
stroying CUDA contexts. For example, Table 6 shows how
many times each type of membar-generating activity is trig-
Table 6: The number of each type of membar-generating ac-
tivities triggered during GPT-Neo 1.3B inference; the results
are collected using NVIDIA Nsight Systems [49].
Launching
kernels
Calling
cudaFree
Calling
cudaMemcpy
Calling
cudaMemset
Crea./destr.
contexts
19K 1 905 72 2
gered during a single inference pass of GPT-Neo 1.3B [48], a
widely used LLM.
Given this, the attacker can use Membar+Load to detect
kernel launches in the victim and leak sensitive information
correlated with kernel launch patterns. We demonstrate this
attack on LLM inference and a few other applications. In this
section, we focus on the attack against LLM inference; the
attacks on other applications can be found in Appendix D and
Appendix E.
LLM inference typically consists of a sequence of kernel
launches, with each kernel carrying out a specific operation
such as matrix multiplication or normalization. Because these
operations differ in complexity, their execution times vary. As
a result, the intervals between consecutive kernel launches
are not uniform, leading to variations in the kernel launch
patterns. Using the receiver mechanism of Membar+Load
described in Section 5, the attacker can capture a timing trace
(similar to Figure 6) which reflects the kernel launch patterns
during LLM inference. We find that this trace can be used
to achieve two objectives: 1) fingerprinting the LLM in use,
and 2) leaking the input/output sizes (which can be used to
infer the topic of the inference task [50]). In the rest of this
section, we first introduce the threat model, and then describe
the details of these two attacks. Note that all the experiments
to evaluate these two attacks are conducted on the same H100
GPU system used in previous sections (cf. Table 1).
6.1 Threat Model
We assume a similar threat model as in Section 5. Specifically,
the system of interest is equipped with an NVIDIA GPU with
MIG enabled. The attacker and the victim are assigned to
different MIG instances. The victim performs LLM inference.
The attacker’s goal is to leak information about the victim,
such as fingerprinting the model being used. We do not as-
sume any shared data between the attacker and the victim, nor
any privileged access to the system. In addition, we assume
the victim uses a fixed batch size, e.g., one, since MIG is most
likely adopted when inference is performed for personal use.
6.2 LLM Fingerprinting Attack
The goal of this attack is to fingerprint the LLM used by
the victim. LLM fingerprinting has significant security and
Table 7: The LLM fingerprinting evaluation results: macro-
averaged F1 (%), Precision (%), and Recall (%).
Models F1 Precision Recall
µ(σ) µ(σ) µ(σ)
All models 94.28 (3.12) 94.42 (3.43) 94.31 (4.79)
Encoder-Decoder 93.71 (2.38) 93.25 (2.85) 94.29 (3.75)
Decoder-Only 94.58 (3.42) 95.04 (3.55) 94.32 (5.27)
privacy implications. First, different models are tuned for
different tasks; identifying the model in use can reveal the
inference purpose. Second, each LLM may have its own set
of vulnerabilities or limitations. Fingerprinting the model
allows the attacker to launch more targeted follow-on attacks,
such as crafting adversarial inputs. Third, in model-routing
systems that dynamically select the LLM to use based on user
inputs [51], identifying the LLM being used can leak sensitive
information about the victim’s input.
Attack method. Different LLMs have distinct architectures
and algorithms, which result in different CUDA kernel launch
patterns during inference. By monitoring these patterns, the
attacker can identify the model used by the victim.
The attack consists of two phases. In the offline data col-
lection and training phase, the attacker uses Membar+Load
to collect timing traces during the inference with each LLM
from a list of popular LLMs; then, the attacker trains a classi-
fier using these traces. In the online attack phase, the attacker
records the timing trace during the victim’s inference and
feeds it to the trained classifier to determine which LLM the
victim is using.
Evaluation. We evaluate this attack method on a list of 20
LLMs. These LLMs are all from Hugging Face [52], and they
cover both encoder-decoder models (for translation/summa-
rization) and decoder-only models (for text generation). The
full list is provided in Appendix F. For each LLM, we collect
300 traces. Each trace is 3 seconds long, which is sufficient
for all models to complete one inference pass in our setup. We
sample every 0.2 ms, which produces 15,000 data points per
trace. To reduce the length of the traces sent to the classifier,
we downsample each trace by a factor of 5 to reduce it to
3,000 samples. Note that when collecting the traces, we run
each of the LLMs with varying prompts. We do this because
the prompt can affect the collected timing trace. For example,
the prompt content affects the output length, which directly
influences the number of iterations in the decode stage of
the inference (further explained in Section 6.3).8 This in turn
affects how many times the one-iteration decode pattern ap-
pears in the collected trace. By varying the prompts, we can
capture these effects in the evaluation.
For the classifier, we use a one-dimensional CNN (1D-
8The maximum number of output tokens is set in the configuration.
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592Flan-T5-Base
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592Llama-3.2 1B
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592GPT-Neo 1.3B
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
Figure 8: The raw timing traces corresponding to three widely
used LLMs.
CNN), similar to prior work [46]. We use the CrossEntropy-
Loss function to handle the multi-class classification task
and use the AdamW optimizer to adapt the learning rate. To
evaluate the fingerprinting performance, we conduct 5-fold
cross-validation and the results are shown in Table 7. On av-
erage, our attack achieves a classification accuracy (F1 score)
of 94.28%. The accuracy for decoder-only models is slightly
higher than that for encoder-decoder models. Figure 8 shows
example traces collected for Llama-3.2 1B [53], Flan-T5-
Base [54], and GPT-Neo 1.3B [48]. Moreover, Appendix F
provides additional traces with different prompts.
6.3 LLM Input/Output Profiling Attack
LLM inference typically consists of two stages, prefill and
decode. In the prefill stage, the LLM processes the entire
input sequence in one forward pass to build the initial key-
value (KV) cache. In the decode stage, the LLM generates
output tokens one at a time, using the cached context from
the prefill stage. Each decode step produces one output token,
and this process repeats until the desired number of tokens
is generated or a stopping condition is met. Compared to the
decode stage, the prefill stage is more computationally inten-
sive, since it processes the entire input at once. As a result, the
kernels launched during the prefill stage typically have longer
execution times, resulting in lower launch frequencies. This
distinction makes these two stages clearly distinguishable in
the timing trace captured by the attacker.
Figure 9 shows two traces captured for the GPT-Neo 1.3B
model. The upper trace corresponds to a full inference pass
that produces multiple output tokens. The lower trace captures
only the prefill stage; this is achieved by setting the maximum
output token count to 1, which effectively skips the decode
stage. In the prefill stage, kernel launches are more spread
out and produce a weaker timing signal. In contrast, in the
decode stage, the launches are denser and result in a stronger
timing impact. This distinction allows the attacker to identify
15681576158415920.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592PrefillDecodeTime (s)
Latency (Cycles)
Figure 9: The raw timing traces collected for 1) both the
prefill and decode stages and 2) only the prefill stage, during
the inference with GPT-Neo 1.3B.
the prefill and decode stages from a captured trace and use
this information to infer high-level properties of the input and
output (e.g., the length), as we explain below.
First, the duration of the decode stage reflects the number
of output tokens. Since the decode stage generates output
tokens one at a time, longer outputs result in longer decode
stages. This allows the attacker to infer the number of output
tokens, which may provide clues about the output content.
We demonstrate the attack on GPT-Neo 1.3B, but it applies
to other LLMs as well. We run inference with different out-
put lengths, and our results show that different output lengths
lead to clearly different decode stage durations. For example,
Figure 10 shows the distribution of decode stage durations
for outputs of 30, 31, and 32 tokens. To evaluate this attack,
we collect traces with output lengths ranging from 30 to 100
tokens, which reflect typical chatbot responses. For each out-
put length, we compute the kernel density estimate (KDE)
of the decode stage duration and set decision boundaries at
the intersections of adjacent KDE curves. Our results show
that the output lengths can be distinguished at single-token
granularity with an accuracy of 97.4%. Note that one token
corresponds to 0.75 English words on average [55].
1.70 1.72 1.74 1.76 1.78 1.80 1.82 1.84 1.86 1.88 1.90 1.92020406080
  
CountLatency (s) length=30 length=31 length=32
Figure 10: The distribution of decode stage duration for GPT-
Neo 1.3B, with an output length of 30, 31, and 32, respectively.
Similarly, the duration of the prefill stage can reveal the
input prompt length: although in the prefill stage the entire
input is processed at once rather than token by token, a longer
input results in a higher computational cost. The evaluation
for GPT-Neo 1.3B is provided in Appendix G. Note that
for certain LLMs, such as Llama-3.2 1B, inferring the input
length is very difficult because its prefill stage is extremely
short. However, this attack method remains effective for other
LLMs.
Using the numbers of input and output tokens together, the
attacker can infer additional information about the LLM infer-
ence. For example, prior work [50] shows that this information
can reveal the topic of the task: summarization tasks typically
have long inputs and short outputs, while context-creation
tasks are the opposite.
7 Discussion
7.1 Results with Different GPUs and Drivers
In addition to the system specified in Table 1 with an H100
GPU, we have also tested our findings on other MIG-capable
GPUs, including another Hopper GPU (H200) as well as two
Ampere GPUs (A30 and A100).
For the H200 GPU which also supports the second-
generation MIG, we observe results consistent with those
on the H100. All the takeaways from Section 4 hold on the
H200, and Membar+Load works effectively, as both a covert
channel and side-channel attack. In contrast, the Ampere
GPUs, which feature the first-generation MIG, exhibit slightly
different behavior. On these GPUs, issuing MEMBAR.GPU
and MEMBAR.SYS in one instance still affects the latency of
LD.STRONG.GPU in another. However, kernel launches do not
trigger membars; only calling the CUDA memory manage-
ment APIs and creating/destroying CUDA contexts trigger
membars. Therefore, while our covert channel described ear-
lier still functions, the side-channel attacks no longer work.
Nonetheless, if an application frequently calls the CUDA
memory management APIs (e.g., cudaMemcpy due to mem-
ory oversubscription [32]), it may create opportunities for
side-channel attacks.
Moreover, we tested our experiments with multiple
NVIDIA drivers, ranging from version 560.35.03 (released
in August 2024) to 570.172.08 (released in July 2025). We
also tested multiple CUDA versions, from CUDA 12.0 to
CUDA 12.8. The results show that neither the driver nor the
CUDA version affects our findings on both Hopper and Am-
pere GPUs.
7.2 Countermeasures
One possible defense against membar-based attacks is to ob-
fuscate the timing signal by introducing additional membars.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, MIG supports up to seven (or
four) instances on a GPU. If the victim can acquire more than
one instance, it could run a secondary workload in one in-
stance that randomly issues MEMBAR.GPU/MEMBAR.SYS, while
running the main application in another. Note that alterna-
tively, the victim could insert MEMBAR.GPU/MEMBAR.SYS di-
rectly into its application code. However, this approach may
incur high performance overhead: while membars cause only
subtle timing effects on load/store operations in other in-
stances, they significantly degrade the performance of load/s-
tore operations within the same instance.
Another potential defense is to merge the application code
into fewer, longer-running kernels (which has been proposed
for performance reasons [56, 57]). Our attacks rely on detect-
ing frequent kernel launches to leak information; reducing
the kernel launch frequency makes it harder for the attacker
to extract useful information. However, applying this strategy
requires substantial engineering effort—especially when the
original code heavily relies on closed-source libraries such as
cuDNN, which inherently use short kernels.
7.3 Limitations
A major limitation of the side-channel attacks described in
Section 6, particularly the input/output length attack, is the
batch size. Specifically, to accurately leak input and output
lengths, we assume a batch size of one. When the batch size
is larger than one, leaking input and output length for each
prompt becomes much more challenging; instead, only coarse-
grained information can be leaked. Taking output length as
an example, each prompt in a batch may finish decoding at
a different time, producing multiple distinct “drop-offs” in
the timing trace. Therefore, an attacker can observe the set
of output lengths, but it cannot reliably map each length to
a specific prompt. This limitation is common in LLM side-
channel attacks, e.g., MoEcho [58].
However, MIG is more likely to be used for lightly loaded
inference scenarios, where a batch size of one is common. In
contrast, larger batch sizes are typically used in large-scale de-
ployments serving many users, which require more hardware
resources and are therefore less likely to use MIG.
Table 8: The maximum channel capacity of Membar+Load
with one or two co-running workloads that launch kernels at
different frequencies.
Kernel launch frequency 1 KHz 2 KHz 3 KHz
One co-running workloads 1.30 kbps 1.05 kbps 0.97 kbps
Two co-running workloads 0.93 kbps 0.87 kbps 0.77 kbps
Noise tolerance. In the experiments in Section 5 and Sec-
tion 6, we assume that the attacker and victim (or sender and
receiver) are the only workloads running on the GPU. In
practice, however, additional co-running workloads may be
present, and their activities can introduce noise into Mem-
bar+Load. Specifically, membars issued by any user can per-
turb the attacker’s timing measurements, and the attacker
cannot distinguish whether a high-latency sample originates
from the victim or from other workloads. Higher membar-
generation rates therefore introduce more noise.
We evaluate this effect by adding co-running workloads
that launch kernels at different frequencies. While the channel
capacity is reduced, Membar+Load remains functional under
these conditions. Detailed results are shown in Table 8. Note
that enabling seven MIG instances leaves each instance with
very limited memory; in practice, deploying fewer but larger
MIG instances is more realistic.
7.4 Related Work
Over the past decade, there have been many studies on GPU
side channels. A large portion of them target the cache hierar-
chy. For example, Naghibijouybariet al. built covert channels
using contention in the L1 and L2 caches [59]. Dutta et al.
showed that when an attacker on one GPU can access the
victim’s device memory on another GPU, it can mount cross-
GPU L2 cache attacks [36]. More recently, Zhang et al. pro-
posed a timer-free cache attack that leverages the CCTL.RML2
instruction (a.k.a., DISCARD) [35]. Beyond caches, researchers
have also exploited other shared resources for covert and side
channels, including GPU functional units [59], memory com-
ponents [60, 61], software interfaces such as performance
counters and APIs [62], and even scheduling policies [63].
However, all these attacks rely on hardware or software
resources being shared between the attacker and victim—
resources that MIG partitions across instances. As a result,
they are no longer effective when the attacker and victim run
in different MIG instances.
Attacks across GPU MIG instances. There are only a few
GPU attacks that claim to work across MIG instances. First,
prior work [33] showed that although MIG partitions the
cache and memory system, it does not partition the Translation
Lookaside Buffer (TLB) on Ampere GPUs. By creating TLB
conflicts, an attacker can fingerprint the CNN models used
by a victim. However, as noted in their paper, this attack is
effective only during the model-loading phase. Moreover,
according to NVIDIA [31], the TLB side channel has been
mitigated on Hopper GPUs.
In addition, several studies have shown that an attacker
can build side-channel attacks by creating and detecting con-
tention on the PCIe bus between the CPU and GPU [32, 64].
Because the PCIe bus is shared across all MIG instances, this
attack method remains possible even when MIG is enabled.
However, compared to Membar+Load, this method is more
susceptible to noise from other PCIe devices. Additionally,
these prior studies assume either 1) the victim’s DNN model
does not fit entirely in GPU memory and thus the model pa-
rameters must be frequently swapped between CPU and GPU
memory, or 2) the victim is training a model—rather than run-
ning inference—which involves substantial data movement
over PCIe. If the victim is performing DNN inference and the
entire model fits in GPU memory, the PCIe usage is minimal
and this contention-based attack becomes challenging, while
Membar+Load still functions.
8 Conclusion
In this work, we presented the first cache attack that operates
across MIG instances on NVIDIA GPUs. We showed that
although MIG partitions the L2 cache, certain L2 operations—
specifically membars—can still affect the execution time of
load operations in another instance. Based on this observation,
we developed Membar+Load, a timing-based covert channel
that functions across MIG instances. We further demonstrated
that Membar+Load can also work as a side-channel attack: the
attacker in one instance can detect the membar-generating ac-
tivities from the victim in another instance and leak sensitive
information related to those activities.
9 Acknowledgment
We thank the anonymous USENIX Security 2026 reviewers
for their constructive feedback. This work was supported in
part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grants
#2530649 and #2443671.
Ethical Considerations
The ethical implications of this work were carefully consid-
ered throughout the research process. Our study exposes a
new cache side-channel vulnerability in NVIDIA MIG. We
believe our findings are critical for advancing GPU security
research; however, they also pose potential risks if misused.
Below, we outline the primary stakeholders, the impacts of
our research, the steps we have taken to mitigate the risks
brought by our research, and why we have decided to publish
the paper.
Stakeholders. The primary stakeholders are GPU vendors,
GPU users, and security researchers.
• GPU vendors. GPU vendors, especially NVIDIA, are di-
rectly affected because the identified vulnerability reveals
design limitations in current hardware isolation mechanism
on NVIDIA GPUs. We have disclosed the discovered vul-
nerability to GPU vendors (as explained below). This paper
may cause vendors to reexamine their partitioning designs,
allocate engineering resources to develop mitigations, and
update guidance provided to customers.
• GPU users. GPU users may be impacted because the dis-
covered vulnerability can leak sensitive information in
multi-tenant environments. For example, the attack can
reveal the LLM model being used or the sizes of inference
inputs and outputs. These outcomes affect user privacy and
may influence workload deployment decisions. At the same
time, users stand to gain from increased transparency about
the limitations of current GPU isolation mechanism.
• Security researchers. Security researchers benefit from
a clearer understanding of GPU microarchitectural risks.
This work highlights gaps in current GPU partitioning tech-
niques and can guide the development of more robust de-
fense mechanisms.
Impacts. GPUs are increasingly used to accelerate critical
workloads such as AI, and cloud providers often rely on hard-
ware partitioning techniques like NVIDIA MIG to increase
GPU utilization while protecting user security and privacy.
The positive impact (beneficence) of our work is that it iden-
tifies a security flaw in the design of MIG, which enables
vendors and operators to strengthen isolation mechanisms
and improve protections for GPU users. It also raises aware-
ness of GPU security and may encourage further research
in this area. At the same time, the vulnerability introduces
potential harms. An adversary could exploit the side channel
to infer sensitive workload characteristics, such as the model
used during LLM inference or the sizes of input and output
data, creating tangible privacy risks. These risks are worsened
when users trust that MIG fully prevents cross-tenant leakage
and do not deploy additional defenses against side-channel
attacks.
Mitigations. We have taken multiple steps in mitigating the
discovered vulnerability. First, to reduce the risk of the dis-
covered vulnerability being used by an adversary, we have
provided practical mitigation strategies in Section 7 that users
can adopt to harden their workloads against the discovered
vulnerability. These measures provide an additional layer of
defense while waiting for official vendor patches. In addi-
tion, we disclosed our findings to NVIDIA on June 30, 2025.
NVIDIA requested a three-month embargo on July 25, 2025
and lifted it on October 13, 2025. We also disclosed our find-
ings to AMD since AMD has CPX on their MI300X GPU,
which is similar to NVIDIA’s MIG. The disclosure made
GPU vendors aware of the discovered vulnerability so that
they can investigate internally and evaluate potential miti-
gation approaches. NVIDIA did not provide us with details
about any mitigation plans for Hopper GPUs. However, they
briefly mentioned that newer Blackwell GPUs have included a
stronger MIG isolation mechanism, which reduces the signal-
to-noise ratio of our attack and can therefore help mitigate
it. AMD investigated our attack internally on their GPUs and
informed us that they plan to release a security brief advis-
ing their customers to continue following established best
practices for defending against side-channel attacks.
Importantly, all the experiments in this study were con-
ducted in a controlled environment on machines owned solely
by the authors. No public clouds or third-party systems were
targeted, ensuring that no external users were harmed by our
work.
Decision to publish the paper. After considering both the
benefits and the potential harms of this work, we believe that
publishing the paper is justified. The paper offers long-term
security gains, such as raising awareness of GPU side-channel
risks, encouraging follow-up research, and enabling vendors
to improve their designs. Although the findings introduce
risks of misuse, we provide practical defense mechanisms
that GPU users and operators can adopt to reduce the risks in
practice. Overall, we believe the benefits outweigh the risks.
Open Science
All the artifacts supporting this paper are permanently avail-
able at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17861917.
These artifacts include 1) the source code and compilation
scripts for characterizing the cross-instance impact of
membars, 2) the source code and compilation scripts for
Membar+Load, the cross-instance covert channel, and 3) the
source code, compilation scripts, and testing scripts for the
side-channel attack primitive.
References
[1] Y . Jiang, Y . Zhu, C. Lan, B. Yi, Y . Cui, and C. Guo, “A
unified architecture for accelerating distributed DNN
training in heterogeneous GPU/CPU clusters,” in14th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI), 2020.
[2] T. Liao, Y . Zhang, P. M. Kekenes-Huskey, Y . Cheng,
A. Michailova, A. D. McCulloch, M. Holst, and J. A.
McCammon, “Multi-core CPU or GPU-accelerated mul-
tiscale modeling for biomolecular complexes,”Compu-
tational and Mathematical Biophysics, vol. 1, no. 2013,
pp. 164–179, 2013.
[3] A. Welivita, I. Perera, D. Meedeniya, A. Wickrama-
rachchi, and V . Mallawaarachchi, “Managing complex
workflows in bioinformatics: An interactive toolkit
with GPU acceleration,” IEEE transactions on nanobio-
science, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 199–208, 2018.
[4] Y . Yarom and K. Falkner, “FLUSH+RELOAD: A high
resolution, low noise, L3 cache side-channel attack,” in
23rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security),
2014.
[5] D. Gruss, C. Maurice, K. Wagner, and S. Mangard,
“Flush+Flush: A fast and stealthy cache attack,” in In-
ternational Conference on Detection of Intrusions and
Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment, 2016.
[6] Y . A. Younis, K. Kifayat, Q. Shi, and B. Askwith, “A
new prime and probe cache side-channel attack for cloud
computing,” in IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter and Information Technology; Ubiquitous Comput-
ing and Communications; Dependable, Autonomic and
Secure Computing; Pervasive Intelligence and Comput-
ing, 2015.
[7] F. Liu, Y . Yarom, Q. Ge, G. Heiser, and R. B. Lee, “Last-
level cache side-channel attacks are practical,” inIEEE
symposium on security and privacy (S&P), 2015.
[8] W. Xiong and J. Szefer, “Leaking information through
cache LRU states,” in IEEE International Symposium
on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
2020.
[9] S. Briongos, P. Malagón, J. M. Moya, and T. Eisen-
barth, “RELOAD+REFRESH: Abusing cache replace-
ment policies to perform stealthy cache attacks,” in29th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2020.
[10] F. Yao, M. Doroslovacki, and G. Venkataramani, “Are
coherence protocol states vulnerable to information leak-
age?” in IEEE International Symposium on High Per-
formance Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2018.
[11] D. Gruss, R. Spreitzer, and S. Mangard, “Cache tem-
plate attacks: Automating attacks on inclusive last-level
caches,” in24th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security), 2015.
[12] D. Gullasch, E. Bangerter, and S. Krenn, “Cache games–
bringing access-based cache attacks on AES to practice,”
in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) ,
2011.
[13] C. Percival, “Cache missing for fun and profit,” 2005.
[14] D. A. Osvik, A. Shamir, and E. Tromer, “Cache attacks
and countermeasures: the case of AES,” inCryptogra-
phers’ track at the RSA conference, 2006.
[15] Y . Oren, V . P. Kemerlis, S. Sethumadhavan, and A. D.
Keromytis, “The sandbox: Practical cache attacks in
JavaScript and their implications,” in ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Secu-
rity (CCS), 2015.
[16] G. Irazoqui, T. Eisenbarth, and B. Sunar, “S$A: A shared
cache attack that works across cores and defies VM
sandboxing–and its application to AES,” inIEEE Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy (S&P), 2015.
[17] T. Ristenpart, E. Tromer, H. Shacham, and S. Savage,
“Hey, you, get off of my cloud: Exploring information
leakage in third-party compute clouds,” inACM SIGSAC
conference on Computer and communications security
(CCS), 2009.
[18] Z. Wu, Z. Xu, and H. Wang, “Whispers in the hyper-
space: High-speed covert channel attacks in the cloud,”
in 21st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security),
2012.
[19] Y . Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart,
“Cross-VM side channels and their use to extract pri-
vate keys,” in ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer
and communications security (CCS), 2012.
[20] ——, “Cross-tenant side-channel attacks in PaaS clouds,”
in ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security (CCS), 2014.
[21] R. Hund, C. Willems, and T. Holz, “Practical timing side
channel attacks against kernel space ASLR,” in IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P), 2013.
[22] O. Aciiçmez, “Yet another microarchitectural attack: ex-
ploiting I-cache,” in ACM Workshop on Computer Secu-
rity Architecture, 2007.
[23] O. Acıiçmez and W. Schindler, “A vulnerability in RSA
implementations due to instruction cache analysis and
its demonstration on OpenSSL,” in Cryptographers’
Track at the RSA Conference, 2008.
[24] A. Shusterman, A. Agarwal, S. O’Connell, D. Genkin,
Y . Oren, and Y . Yarom, “Prime+ Probe 1, JavaScript 0:
Overcoming browser-based side-channel defenses,” in
30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security),
2021.
[25] L. G. Bruinderink, A. Hülsing, T. Lange, and Y . Yarom,
“Flush, Gauss, and Reload–a cache attack on the BLISS
Lattice-based signature scheme,” inInternational Con-
ference on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Sys-
tems, 2016.
[26] A. Shusterman, L. Kang, Y . Haskal, Y . Meltser, P. Mittal,
Y . Oren, and Y . Yarom, “Robust website fingerprinting
through the cache occupancy channel,” in 28th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2019.
[27] C. Disselkoen, D. Kohlbrenner, L. Porter, and D. Tullsen,
“Prime+Abort: A timer-free high-precision L3 cache at-
tack using Intel TSX,” in 26th USENIX Security Sympo-
sium (USENIX Security), 2017.
[28] T. Hornby, “Side-channel attacks on everyday applica-
tions: Distinguishing inputs with Flush+Reload,” Black-
Hat USA, 2016.
[29] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU Ar-
chitecture,” available at https://images.nvidia.
com/aem-dam/en-zz/Solutions/data-center/
nvidia-ampere-architecture-whitepaper.pdf.
[30] ——, “NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU Archi-
tecture,” available at https://resources.nvidia.com/
en-us-data-center-overview/gtc22-whitepaper-hopper.
[31] ——, “Confidential Compute on NVIDIA Hopper
H100,” available at https://images.nvidia.com/aem-dam/
en-zz/Solutions/data-center/HCC-Whitepaper-v1.0.
pdf.
[32] Y . Miao, Y . Zhang, D. Wu, D. Zhang, G. Tan, R. Zhang,
and M. T. Kandemir, “Veiled Pathways: Investigating
covert and side channels within GPU uncore,” in57th
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitec-
ture (MICRO), 2024.
[33] Z. Zhang, T. Allen, F. Yao, X. Gao, and R. Ge, “Tun-
neLs for Bootlegging: Fully reverse-engineering GPU
TLBs for challenging isolation guarantees of NVIDIA
MIG,” inACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS), 2023.
[34] J. Alglave, M. Batty, A. F. Donaldson, G. Gopalakrish-
nan, J. Ketema, D. Poetzl, T. Sorensen, and J. Wick-
erson, “GPU Concurrency: Weak behaviours and pro-
gramming assumptions,” inProceedings of the Twenti-
eth International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(ASPLOS), 2015.
[35] Z. Zhang, K. Cai, Y . Guo, F. Yao, and X. Gao, “Inval-
idate+Compare: A timer-free GPU cache attack prim-
itive,” in33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security), 2024.
[36] S. B. Dutta, H. Naghibijouybari, A. Gupta, N. Abu-
Ghazaleh, A. Marquez, and K. Barker, “Spy in the GPU-
Box: Covert and side channel attacks on multi-GPU
systems,” in Proceedings of the 50th Annual Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) ,
2023.
[37] D. Shreiner and T. K. O. A. W. Group, OpenGL
Programming Guide: The official guide to learning
OpenGL, Versions 3.0 and 3.1, 7th ed. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2009.
[38] F. Luna, Introduction to 3D game programming with
DirectX 12. Mercury Learning and Information, 2016.
[39] NVIDIA, “CUDA C++ Programming Guide,” avail-
able at https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/pdf/CUDA_C_
Programming_Guide.pdf.
[40] ——, “NVIDIA AI Enterprise Deployment Guide,”
available at https://docs.nvidia.com/ai-enterprise/
deployment/vmware/latest/advance-gpu.html#
terminology.
[41] ——, “Deployment Guide for SecureAI,” available at
https://docs.nvidia.com/cc-deployment-guide-tdx.pdf.
[42] ——, “NVIDIA Nsight Compute,” available at https:
//developer.nvidia.com/nsight-compute.
[43] D. Lustig, S. Sahasrabuddhe, and O. Giroux, “A for-
mal analysis of the NVIDIA PTX memory consistency
model,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Program-
ming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) ,
2019.
[44] NVIDIA, “Parallel Thread Execution ISA Version
8.8,” available at https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/
parallel-thread-execution/index.html.
[45] R. Paccagnella, L. Luo, and C. W. Fletcher, “Lord of the
Ring(s): Side channel attacks on the CPU on-chip ring
interconnect are practical,” in 30th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security), 2021.
[46] D. R. Dipta and B. Gulmezoglu, “DF-SCA: Dynamic
frequency side channel attacks are practical.”
[47] T. Sorensen and A. F. Donaldson, “Exposing errors re-
lated to weak memory in GPU applications,” in 37th
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2016.
[48] “GPT-Neo 1.3B,” available at https://huggingface.co/
EleutherAI/gpt-neo-1.3B.
[49] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA Nsight Systems,” available at https:
//developer.nvidia.com/nsight-systems.
[50] P. Patel, E. Choukse, C. Zhang, A. Shah, Í. Goiri,
S. Maleki, and R. Bianchini, “Splitwise: Efficient gen-
erative LLM inference using phase splitting,” in 2024
ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2024.
[51] Q. J. Hu, J. Bieker, X. Li, N. Jiang, B. Keigwin, G. Ran-
ganath, K. Keutzer, and S. K. Upadhyay, “Routerbench:
A benchmark for multi-LLM routing system,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.12031, 2024.
[52] “Hugging Face,” available at https://huggingface.co/.
[53] “Llama-3.2-1B,” available at https://huggingface.co/
meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B.
[54] “FLAN-T5 base,” available at https://huggingface.co/
google/flan-t5-base.
[55] OpenAI, “Key concepts to understand when working
with the OpenAI API,” available at https://platform.
openai.com/docs/concepts/tokens.
[56] K. Gupta, J. A. Stuart, and J. D. Owens, “A study of
persistent threads style GPU programming for GPGPU
workloads,” in2012 Innovative Parallel Computing (In-
Par), 2012, pp. 1–14.
[57] T. Sorensen, A. F. Donaldson, M. Batty, G. Gopalakr-
ishnan, and Z. Rakamari ´c, “Portable inter-workgroup
barrier synchronisation for GPUs,” in Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference
on Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages,
and Applications (OOPSLA), 2016.
[58] R. Ding, T. Xu, X. Shen, A. A. Ding, and Y . Fei, “Moe-
cho: Exploiting side-channel attacks to compromise
user privacy in mixture-of-experts llms,” in2025 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (CCS), 2025.
[59] H. Naghibijouybari, K. N. Khasawneh, and N. Abu-
Ghazaleh, “Constructing and characterizing covert chan-
nels on GPGPUs,” in Proceedings of the 50th annual
IEEE/ACM international symposium on microarchitec-
ture (MICRO), 2017, pp. 354–366.
[60] T. Sorensen and H. Khlaaf, “LeftoverLocals: Listening
to LLM responses through leaked GPU local memory,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16603, 2024.
[61] R. Nazaraliyev, Y . Zhang, S. B. Dutta, A. Marquez,
K. Barker, and N. Abu-Ghazaleh, “Not so Refreshing:
Attacking GPUs using RFM rowhammer mitigation,” in
34rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security),
2025.
[62] H. Naghibijouybari, A. Neupane, Z. Qian, and N. Abu-
Ghazaleh, “Rendered Insecure: GPU side channel at-
tacks are practical,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
SIGSAC conference on computer and communications
security (CCS), 2018.
[63] J. Wei, Y . Zhang, Z. Zhou, Z. Li, and M. A. Al Faruque,
“Leaky DNN: Stealing deep-learning model secret with
GPU context-switching side-channel,” in2020 50th An-
nual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Depend-
able Systems and Networks (DSN), 2020.
[64] M. Tan, J. Wan, Z. Zhou, and Z. Li, “Invisible Probe:
Timing attacks with PCIe congestion side-channel,” in
2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) ,
2021.
[65] “Stanford Network Analysis Project,” available at http:
//snap.stanford.edu/data/index.html.
[66] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask
r-cnn,” inProceedings of the IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
[67] R. Kraus, “Traffic Camera Object Detection,” avail-
able at https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ryankraus/
traffic-camera-object-detection?resource=download.
[68] “Google-switch-base-8,” available at https:
//huggingface.co/google/switch-base-8.
Appendix
A Cross-Instance Cache Eviction
Since each MIG instance has its own L2 cache partition that
cannot be accessed by other instances, workloads running in
one instance should, in theory, never be able to evict data from
the L2 partition of another instance. Here, we empirically
verify whether this claim always holds: we check if any L2
set of one instance observes additional evictions when certain
GPU activity is present in another instance.
Experiments. We use two MIG instances in our experiment,
Ins0 and Ins1. In Ins0 we run a stressor workload that trig-
gers various types of user-level and driver-level GPU activi-
ties, which are exactly the same with the ones in Section 4.1.
Specifically, user-level activities include directly issuing data
accesses using the LD, ST, or ATOM SASS instructions. Driver-
level activities include launching CUDA kernels, managing
CUDA memory, and controlling CUDA execution flow (e.g.,
events and contexts). The details of these activities can be
found in Section 4.1.
In Ins1 we run a detector workload that examines whether
any of these activities cause evictions in the detector’s L2
cache partition. To achieve this, the detector first constructs an
eviction set (i.e., a group of cache lines mapped to the same L2
set) for each cache set in the L2 partition ofIns1. This is done
using the method from prior work [35]. With these eviction
sets, the detector then uses Invalidate+Compare [35], the GPU
version of timer-free Prime+Probe, to detect evictions in its
own L2 partition: it fills all the cache sets (within the L2
partition) using the cache lines in the eviction sets, waits for
a period of time, and then checks how many of these cache
lines in each L2 set have been evicted.
Results. We repeat the detector 1K times (with each stressor)
and we find that, all the tested user-level activities do not
trigger any cross-instance L2 cache evictions.
In addition, most of the driver-level GPU activities from
the stressor also do not trigger any cross-instance L2 evictions.
However, there is one exception: when the stressor repeatedly
destroys CUDA contexts, all the cache lines in each L2 set
of the detector’s instance (Ins1) are always evicted. Then, by
varying the number of MIG instances enabled and adjusting
the assignment of instances for the stressor and detector, we
find that destroying a CUDA context in any MIG instance
triggers an L2 cache flush across the entire GPU, evicting
data in all L2 partitions belonging to all MIG instances. This
also explains why, in Figure 2, the increase in the total number
of L2 requests is greater than the increase in the number of
membars for the context-creating/destroying stressor.
Is this a security concern? CUDA context creation and de-
struction do not occur frequently in modern GPU applications.
They typically happen only at the beginning and end of an
application, which makes this cross-instance eviction difficult
for an attacker to exploit.
B MEMBAR.SM and MEMBAR.VC
We find that, compared to the baseline with no stressor run-
ning, the stressor issuing MEMBAR.SM does not affect the num-
ber of membars observed by the profiler in the detector’s
instance, similar to the stressor issuing MEMBAR.CTA. In con-
trast, the stressor issuing MEMBAR.VC increases the number of
GPU-wide membars in the profiling results, and the magni-
tude of this increase is the same as when the stressor issues
MEMBAR.GPU.
C Observations on LD/ST.STRONG.GPU
We have two observations. First, when a GPU buffer is de-
clared with cuda::atomic, all load and store operations
to this buffer are compiled into the LD.STRONG.GPU and
ST.STRONG.GPU instructions. Second, according to NVIDIA,
the __ldcg() function can be used to load a cache line while
bypassing the L1 cache. We find that using this function
causes the corresponding load operation to be compiled into
a LD.STRONG.GPU instruction.
D Attack on Graph Processing Workloads
For graph processing workloads, such as breadth-first search
(BFS), the size of the input graph—specifically the number of
nodes and edges—affects both the number of CUDA kernels
launched and the execution time of each kernel. Different
graphs often have different sizes and structures, which in turn
lead to distinct kernel launch patterns for the same workload.
By detecting the kernel launches during the execution of a
graph processing workload using Membar+Load, an attacker
can fingerprint the graph being analyzed by the workload
from a set of known graph candidates.
We demonstrate this fingerprinting attack using five so-
cial network graphs from Stanford Network Analysis Project
(SNAP) [65]: feather-lastfm-social, ego-Facebook,
musae-twitch, gemsec-Deezer, and twitch-gamers. Sim-
ilar to the fingerprinting attack on LLMs, we build a classifier
on timing traces collected during the execution of BFS with
each graph as the input, and conduct 5-fold cross-validation.
Our results show that the classifier achieves a macro F1 score
of 98.4%, recall of 98.5%, and precision of 98.4%.
E Attack on Other AI Workloads
In Section 6, we discussed how Membar+Load can be used to
leak information from LLMs. Here, we extend this discussion
to other types of AI models. Specifically, for some modern
AI models, certain input characteristics directly influence the
kernel launch patterns during inference and can therefore be
leaked using Membar+Load.
First, in object detection models such as Fast R-CNN [66],
the number (and spatial distribution) of detected objects in an
input image affect the amount of region-based computation
performed in later stages, such as region proposal processing.
Consequently, inputs with different object counts induce ob-
servable differences in the number, ordering, and timing of
kernel launches. For example, Figure 11 shows timing traces
captured using Membar+Load while running Fast R-CNN on
inputs containing only five objects and more than 30 objects,
respectively; the two traces exhibit clear differences.
As a result, Membar+Load can be used to infer the num-
ber of detected objects in input images, potentially exposing
sensitive information, such as traffic conditions, when the
inputs are collected from traffic cameras or dash cameras.
To demonstrate this potential, we selected 50 images from
the Traffic Camera Object Detection dataset [67] and divided
them into two classes—light traffic and heavy traffic—based
on the number of objects present. We then trained a binary
classifier on the timing traces collected during Fast R-CNN
inference. Our results show that the classifier achieves an F1
score of 83%.
0.0 0.5 1.01568157615841592160016081616Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
(a) Trace with five objects.
0.0 0.5 1.01568157615841592160016081616Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
(b) Trace with over 30 objects.
Figure 11: The traces captured using Membar+Load when
running Mask R-CNN with different numbers of objects in
the input.
Second, for mixture-of-experts (MoE) models, prior
work [58] has shown that different input prompts can result in
different token loads across experts, i.e., the number of tokens
routed to each expert. This expert-level load information can,
in turn, reveal characteristics of the input prompts. Prior work
demonstrated this leakage using performance-counter-based
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592Flan-T5-Base
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592Flan-T5-Base
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592Llama-3.2 1B
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592Llama-3.2 1B
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592GPT-Neo 1.3B
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.01568157615841592GPT-Neo 1.3B
Latency (Cycles)Time (s)
Figure 12: The raw timing traces corresponding to three
widely used LLMs with different prompts.
attacks; the same leakage can potentially be exploited using
Membar+Load. To demonstrate this potential, we selected
20 prompts with the same total number of tokens but that
induce different token-routing decisions across experts, for a
popular MoE model, switch-base-8 [68]. We then collected
timing traces using Membar+Load while running the MoE
model with each prompt and trained a classifier to fingerprint
the prompts based on these traces. Our results show that the
classifier achieves an F1 score of 99%.
F LLM Fingerprinting
Table 9 provides the full list of LLMs in our LLM fingerprint-
ing attack. Figure 12 shows the raw latency traces collected
by the attacker when different prompts are used.
G LLM Input Profiling Attack
Similar to the attack on the number of output tokens, the du-
ration of the prefill stage can be used to estimate the number
of input tokens. However, we find that this method yields
lower accuracy for input tokens than for output tokens. This
is because, unlike the decode stage—which generates tokens
Table 9: The LLMs tested; for the LLMs that cannot fit in the
GPU memory by default, we the use 4-bit or 8-bit quantized
version.
1. google/flan-t5-large 11. facebook-bart-large
2. google/flan-t5-base 12. google/pegasus-xsum
3. meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B 13. google/switch-base-8
4. EleutherAI/gpt-neo-1.3B 14. microsoft/phi-1_5
5. EleutherAI/gpt-neo-125M 15. Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B
6. EleutherAI/pythia-1B 16. titiuae/Falcon-E-3B-Instruct
7. EleutherAI/pythia-410m 17. tiiuae/falcon-rw-1b
8. distilgpt2 18. google/gemma-3-1b-it
9. Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-en-de 19. facebook/opt-1.3B
10. facebook/bart-base 20. kurakurai/Luth-0.6B-Instruct
sequentially—the prefill stage processes the entire input se-
quence at once. While a longer input leads to a higher com-
putational cost (more attention operations and more memory
movement), the scaling is sublinear with respect to the number
of input tokens. Consequently, variations in input length have
a more limited effect on prefill timing. In our experiments
with GPT-Neo 1.3B, we are able to distinguish input lengths
only at a granularity of about 15 tokens (∼11 words) with an
accuracy of over 90%.
