GPU schedulers: how fair is fair enough?
Tyler Sorensen
Imperial College London, UK
t.sorensen15@imperial.ac.uk
Hugues Evrard
Imperial College London, UK
h.evrard@imperial.ac.uk
Alastair F. Donaldson
Imperial College London, UK
alastair.donaldson@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
Blocking synchronisation idioms, e.g. mutexes and barriers, play an important role in concurrent
programming. However, systems with semi-fair schedulers, e.g. graphics processing units (GPUs),
are becoming increasingly common. Such schedulers provide varying degrees of fairness, guar-
anteeing enough to allow some, but not all, blocking idioms. While a number of applications
that use blocking idioms do run on today’s GPUs, reasoning about liveness properties of such
applications is diﬃcult as documentation is scarce and scattered.
In this work, we aim to clarify fairness properties of semi-fair schedulers. To do this, we
deﬁne a general temporal logic formula, based on weak fairness, parameterised by a predicate that
enables fairness per-thread at certain points of an execution. We then deﬁne fairness properties
for three GPU schedulers: HSA, OpenCL, and occupancy-bound execution. We examine existing
GPU applications and show that none of the above schedulers are strong enough to provide the
fairness properties required by these applications. It hence appears that existing GPU scheduler
descriptions do not entirely capture the fairness properties that are provided on current GPUs.
Thus, we present two new schedulers that aim to support existing GPU applications. We analyse
the behaviour of common blocking idioms under each scheduler and show that one of our new
schedulers allows a more natural implementation of a GPU protocol.
2012 ACM Subject Classiﬁcation Software and its engineering →Semantics, Software and its
engineering →Scheduling, Computing methodologies →Graphics processors
Keywords and phrases GPU scheduling, Blocking synchronisation, GPU semantics
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.4230/LIPIcs.CONCUR.2018.23
1
Introduction
The scheduler of a concurrent system is responsible for the placement of virtual threads
onto hardware resources. There are often insuﬃcient resources for all threads to execute in
parallel, and it is the job of the scheduler to dictate resource sharing, potentially inﬂuencing
the temporal semantics of concurrent programs.
For example, consider a two threaded
program where thread 0 waits for thread 1 to set a ﬂag. If the scheduler never allows thread
1 to execute then the program will hang due to starvation. Thus, to reason about liveness
properties, developers must understand the fairness guarantees provided by the scheduler.
GPUs are highly parallel co-processors found in many devices, from mobile phones to
super computers. While these devices initially accelerated graphics computations, the last
ten years have seen a strong push towards supporting general purpose computation on GPUs.
© Tyler Sorensen, Hugues Evrard, and Alastair F. Donaldson;
licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
29th International Conference on Concurrency Theory (CONCUR 2018).
Editors: Sven Schewe and Lijun Zhang; Article No. 23; pp. 23:1–23:17
Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
23:2
GPU schedulers: how fair is fair enough?
Today, through programming models such as OpenCL [11], CUDA [15], and HSA [8] we have
mature frameworks to execute C-like programs on GPUs.
Current GPU programming models oﬀer a compelling case study for schedulers for three
reasons: (1) some blocking idioms, e.g. barriers, are known to hang due to starvation on
current GPUs [20]; (2) other blocking idioms, e.g. mutexes, run without starvation on current
GPUs; yet (3) documentation for some GPU programming models explicitly states that no
guarantees are provided, while others state only minimal guarantees that are insuﬃcient
to ensure starvation-freedom even for mutexes. Because GPU schedulers are embedded in
closed proprietary frameworks, we do not look at concrete scheduling logic, but instead aim
to derive formal fairness guarantees from prose documentation and observed behaviours.
GPUs have a hierarchical programming model: in OpenCL threads are partitioned into
workgroups. Threads in the same workgroup can synchronise via intrinsic instructions (e.g.
the OpenCL barrier instruction [10, p. 99]). Yet, despite practical use cases (see Section 4),
there are no such intrinsics for inter-workgroup synchronisation. Instead, inter-workgroup
synchronisation is achieved by building constructs, e.g. mutexes, using ﬁner-grained prim-
itives, e.g. atomic read-modify-write instructions (RMWs). However, reasoning about such
constructs is diﬃcult as inter-workgroup thread interactions are relatively unstudied, espe-
cially in relation to fairness. Given this, we focus only on inter-workgroup interactions and
threads will be assumed to be in disjoint workgroups. Under this constraint, it is cumber-
some to use the word workgroup. Because we can think of a workgroup as being a “composite
thread”, we henceforth use the word thread to mean workgroup.
The unfair OpenCL scheduler and non-blocking programs
OpenCL is a programming
model for parallel systems with wide support for GPUs.
Due to scheduling concerns,
OpenCL disallows all blocking synchronisation, stating [11, p. 29]: “A conforming imple-
mentation may choose to serialize the [threads] so a correct algorithm cannot assume that
[threads] will execute in parallel. There is no safe and portable way to synchronize across the
independent execution of [threads] . . . .” Such weak guarantees are acceptable for many GPU
programs, e.g. matrix multiplication, as they are non-blocking. That is, these programs will
terminate under an unfair scheduler, i.e. a scheduler that provides no fairness guarantees.
Blocking idioms and fair schedulers
On the other hand, there are many useful block-
ing synchronisation idioms, which require fairness properties from the scheduler to ensure
starvation-freedom. Three common examples of blocking idioms considered throughout this
work, barrier, mutex and producer-consumer (PC), are described in Table 1. Intuitively, a
fair scheduler provides the guarantee that any thread that is able to execute will eventually
execute. Fair schedulers are able to guarantee starvation-freedom for the idioms of Table 1.
1.1
Semi-fair schedulers: HSA and occupancy-bound execution
We have described two schedulers: fair and unfair, under which starvation-freedom for
blocking idioms is either always or never guaranteed. However, some GPU programming
models have semi-fair schedulers, under which starvation-freedom is guaranteed for only
some blocking idioms. We describe two such schedulers and informally analyse the idioms of
Table 1 under these schedulers (summarised in Table 2). If starvation-freedom is guaranteed
for all threads executing idiom i under scheduler s then we say that i is allowed under s.
Similar to OpenCL, Heterogeneous System Architecture (HSA) is a parallel programming
model designed to eﬃciently target GPUs [8]. Unlike OpenCL however, the HSA scheduler
conditionally allows blocking between threads based on thread ids, a unique contiguous
T. Sorensen, H. Evrard, and A. F. Donaldson
23:3
Table 1 Blocking synchronisation constructs considered in this work
Barrier
Mutex
Producer-consumer (PC)
Aligns the execution of all
participating
threads:
a
thread waits at the barrier
until all threads have reached
the barrier.
Blocking, as a
thread waiting at the barrier
relies on the other threads
to make enough progress to
also reach the barrier.
Provides mutual exclusion for a
critical section. A thread acquires
the mutex before executing the
critical section, ensuring exclusive
access. Upon leaving, the mutex
is released. Blocking, as a thread
waiting to acquire relies on the
the thread in the critical section
to eventually release the mutex.
Provides a handshake betwee