MEMORY DISORDER: Memory Re-orderings as a Timerless Side-channel
Sean Siddens†
Sanya Srivastava
Reese Levine
University of Washington
Duke University
UC Santa Cruz
Josiah Dykstra†
Tyler Sorensen†
Raytheon BBN Technologies
Microsoft Research
UC Santa Cruz
Abstract
To improve efficiency, nearly all parallel processing units
(CPUs and GPUs) implement relaxed memory models in
which memory operations may be re-ordered, i.e., executed
out-of-order. Prior testing work in this area found that memory
re-orderings are observed more frequently when other cores
are active, e.g., stressing the memory system, which likely
triggers aggressive hardware optimizations.
In this work, we present MEMORY DISORDER: a timerless
side-channel that uses memory re-orderings to infer activ-
ity on other processes. We first perform a fuzzing campaign
and show that many mainstream processors (X86/Arm/Apple
CPUs, NVIDIA/AMD/Apple GPUs) are susceptible to cross-
process signals. We then show how the vulnerability can be
used to implement classic attacks, including a covert chan-
nel, achieving up to 16 bits/second with 95% accuracy on
an Apple M3 GPU, and application fingerprinting, achiev-
ing reliable closed-world DNN architecture fingerprinting on
several CPUs and an Apple M3 GPU. Finally, we explore
how low-level system details can be exploited to increase
re-orderings, showing the potential for a covert channel to
achieve nearly 30K bits/second on X86 CPUs. More precise
attacks can likely be developed as the vulnerability becomes
better understood.
1
Introduction
Modern shared memory parallel processors implement com-
plex pipelines and memory systems. This complexity in-
creases efficiency but has also led to security issues, especially
in multiprocessing systems, where sensitive information from
one process can be obtained by another (potentially malicious)
process. Side-channel attacks are especially nefarious, as the
attacker can utilize low-level device details to detect subtle
properties of an unassuming victim process.
There are many types of side-channels, utilizing many dif-
ferent system components. Some side-channels require physi-
†Work performed while at Trail of Bits.
cal access [49], while others require access to low-level APIs,
e.g., to monitor energy [14]. The attack requirements are
referred to as the capability of the attack. A low capability at-
tack has few requirements and, thus, can be deployed in more
situations. For example, classic cache-based side-channels
require precise timers [26]. However, the capability of the
attack can be lowered by removing the timers and instead
using other (seemingly innocent) mechanisms [38].
MEMORY DISORDER
In this work, we present MEMORY
DISORDER (or simply DISORDER): a low-capability side-
channel for parallel processors. DISORDER utilizes memory
re-orderings that arise due to hardware relaxed memory consis-
tency models (or MCMs) [32]. That is, to increase efficiency,
mainstream consumer parallel processors allow memory op-
erations to execute out-of-order, as specified by their MCM.
These behaviors occur both on CPUs [4,39] and GPUs [22].
Memory re-orderings can be observed in small parallel pro-
grams, often called litmus tests, which typically execute with
two threads with two memory operations each. By inspecting
certain variable and memory values after the test execution, it
can be determined if a re-ordering occurred.
Prior works have run these litmus tests across many dif-
ferent processors to test conformance to an MCM specifica-
tion. When testing GPUs, it was found that the number of
observed re-orderings could be amplified by utilizing addi-
tional threads that added stress to the system [3]. Inspired by
these results, this paper explores the potential of memory re-
orderings as a side-channel, where one (potentially malicious)
process repeatedly executes a litmus test, requiring only the
ability to launch threads and execute memory loads and stores.
Other (victim) processes may create identifiable patterns of
system pressure when executing certain programs, causing
re-orderings to be observed by another process.
1
arXiv:2601.08770v1  [cs.CR]  13 Jan 2026
Initially: *x == 0 && *y == 0
thread 0
thread 1
a
Write(x, 1)
c
v0 = Read(y)
b
Write(y, 1)
d
v1 = Read(x)
re-order check: v0 == 1 && v1 == 0
Figure 1: The Message Passing (MP) litmus test. Thread
0 writes to x and then y. Thread 1 reads the values in the
opposite order. If thread 1 observes the updated value for y
before the updated value for x, then a re-ordering occurred.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Memory Re-orderings
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
Frequency
resnet50
googlenet
vgg16
mobilenetv3
alexnet
Figure 2: Histogram of re-ordering observations by an at-
tacker when a victim is running inference from common
DNN architectures on an Apple M3 GPU.
1.1
Example: DNN Architecture Fingerprint-
ing
We illustrate the potential of DISORDER using an example in
which there are two processes: a victim and an attacker. The
victim process repeatedly runs DNN inference on an Apple
M3 GPU, which is known to have a relaxed MCM [19]. The
attacker repeatedly executes a classic litmus test, known as
Message Passing (or MP), shown in Fig. 1. In order to satisfy
the re-order check for this test, either the writes on thread 0
or the reads on thread 1 must be re-ordered. Because these
tests are short, the attacker can execute many iterations while
the victim is executing DNN inference.
Figure 2 shows a histogram of the frequency of ob-
served memory re-orderings by the attacker when the vic-
tim is running 5 different (common) DNN architectures:
resnet50, googlenet, vgg16, mobilenetv3_small (reported as
mobilenetv3 in the figure), and alexnet. We see that each DNN
produces a unique signature, i.e., an approximate normal dis-
tribution of observed re-orderings. We then split these obser-
vations into a training and testing set (discussed in Sec. 5.2)
and show that an attacker can automatically classify which
DNN architecture a victim is running.
1.2
MEMORY DISORDER Overview
This paper provides a detailed investigation into the potential
of memory re-orderings as a side-channel. While there are
many low capability side-channels, e.g., see [51], we believe
MEMORY DISORDER has a range of unique properties:
1. Low capability: DISORDER only requires two threads
and shared memory; it does not require timers, perfor-
mance counters, or physical access.
2. Wide reach: Mainstream processors (CPUs and GPUs)
implement relaxed MCMs, which are accessible through
common programming languages, e.g., C++ [11].
3. Empirically based: Many side-channels target low-level
hardware components through meticulous reverse en-
gineering [2, 33, 51]. DISORDER attacks can be con-
structed using simple empirical fuzzing techniques.
4. Unknown potential and mitigations: The exact hardware
component(s) that cause a memory re-ordering are not
documented or well-understood. As such, it is difficult to
develop rigorous mitigations, and more targeted attacks
can likely be developed through detailed explorations.
This work focuses on the feasibility and breadth of DISOR-
DER: we show that six different architectures are impacted,
spanning both CPUs as well as GPUs; furthermore, we show
that this vulnerability crosses virtualization boundaries (KVM
on Linux). While it is not feasible to reverse engineer the com-
plex hardware interactions that cause memory re-orderings
across all these devices, we provide an initial investigation
into how more targeted approaches can improve re-ordering
observations (i.e., signals) by several orders of magnitude on
X86 CPUs (Sec. 5.3). In other cases, we provide hypothe-
ses and reference documentation when available and leave
more detailed explorations to future work. Thus, DISOR-
DER attacks can be developed with either (1) low precision
using only simple empirical data, or (2) higher-precision, con-
structed by thorough reverse engineering.
We found only one prior security work propos