Cooperative Kernels: GPU Multitasking for Blocking Algorithms
Tyler Sorensen
Imperial College London
London, UK
t.sorensen15@imperial.ac.uk
Hugues Evrard
Imperial College London
London, UK
h.evrard@imperial.ac.uk
Alastair F. Donaldson
Imperial College London
London, UK
alastair.donaldson@imperial.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
There is growing interest in accelerating irregular data-parallel
algorithms on GPUs. These algorithms are typically blocking, so
they require fair scheduling. But GPU programming models (e.g.
OpenCL) do not mandate fair scheduling, and GPU schedulers are
unfair in practice. Current approaches avoid this issue by exploit-
ing scheduling quirks of today’s GPUs in a manner that does not
allow the GPU to be shared with other workloads (such as graphics
rendering tasks). We propose cooperative kernels, an extension to
the traditional GPU programming model geared towards writing
blocking algorithms. Workgroups of a cooperative kernel are fairly
scheduled, and multitasking is supported via a small set of language
extensions through which the kernel and scheduler cooperate. We
describe a prototype implementation of a cooperative kernel frame-
work implemented in OpenCL 2.0 and evaluate our approach by
porting a set of blocking GPU applications to cooperative kernels
and examining their performance under multitasking.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering →Multiprocessing / multi-
programming / multitasking; Semantics; • Computing method-
ologies →Graphics processors;
KEYWORDS
GPU, cooperative multitasking, irregular parallelism
ACM Reference format:
Tyler Sorensen, Hugues Evrard, and Alastair F. Donaldson. 2017. Coopera-
tive Kernels: GPU Multitasking for Blocking Algorithms. In Proceedings of
2017 11th Joint Meeting of the European Software Engineering Conference and
the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
Paderborn, Germany, September 4–8, 2017 (ESEC/FSE’17), 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106265
1
INTRODUCTION
The Needs of Irregular Data-parallel Algorithms. Many inter-
esting data-parallel algorithms are irregular: the amount of work to
be processed is unknown ahead of time and may change dynami-
cally in a workload-dependent manner. There is growing interest in
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE’17, September 4–8, 2017, Paderborn, Germany
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5105-8/17/09...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106265
kill
kill
fork
gather time
time
execution time
3
2
1
0
Graphics request 2CU
Graphics terminated
Host CPU
GPU Compute Units (CU)
graphics
graphics
Figure 1: Cooperative kernels can flexibly resize to let other
tasks, e.g. graphics, run concurrently
accelerating such algorithms on GPUs [1–4, 6, 7, 11, 13, 14, 16, 19,
21, 25, 26, 30, 32]. Irregular algorithms usually require blocking syn-
chronisation between workgroups, e.g. many graph algorithms use
a level-by-level strategy, with a global barrier between levels; work
stealing algorithms require each workgroup to maintain a queue,
typically mutex-protected, to enable stealing by other workgroups.
To avoid starvation, a blocking concurrent algorithm requires
fair scheduling of workgroups. For example, if one workgroup
holds a mutex, an unfair scheduler may cause another workgroup
to spin-wait forever for the mutex to be released. Similarly, an
unfair scheduler can cause a workgroup to spin-wait indefinitely at
a global barrier so that other workgroups do not reach the barrier.
A Degree of Fairness: Occupancy-bound Execution. The cur-
rent GPU programming models—OpenCL [12], CUDA [18] and
HSA [10], specify almost no guarantees regarding scheduling of
workgroups, and current GPU schedulers are unfair in practice.
Roughly speaking, each workgroup executing a GPU kernel is
mapped to a hardware compute unit.1 The simplest way for a GPU
driver to handle more workgroups being launched than there are
compute units is via an occupancy-bound execution model [6, 26]
where, once a workgroup has commenced execution on a compute
unit (it has become occupant), the workgroup has exclusive access
to the compute unit until it finishes execution. Experiments suggest
that this model is widely employed by today’s GPUs [1, 6, 19, 26].
The occupancy-bound execution model does not guarantee fair
scheduling between workgroups: if all compute units are occupied
then a not-yet-occupant workgroup will not be scheduled until
some occupant workgroup completes execution. Yet the execution
model does provide fair scheduling between occupant workgroups,
which are bound to separate compute units that operate in parallel.
Current GPU implementations of blocking algorithms assume the
occupancy-bound execution model, which they exploit by launch-
ing no more workgroups than there are available compute units [6].
1In practice, depending on the kernel, multiple workgroups might map to the same
compute unit; we ignore this in our current discussion.
431
ESEC/FSE’17, September 4–8, 2017, Paderborn, Germany
Tyler Sorensen, Hugues Evrard, and Alastair F. Donaldson
Resistance to Occupancy-bound Execution. Despite its practi-
cal prevalence, none of the current GPU programming models
actually mandate occupancy-bound execution. Further, there are
reasons why this model is undesirable. First, the execution model
does not enable multitasking, since a workgroup effectively owns a
compute unit until the workgroup has completed execution. The
GPU cannot be used meanwhile for other tasks (e.g. rendering). Sec-
ond, energy throttling is an important concern for battery-powered
devices [31]. In the future, it will be desirable for a mobile GPU
driver to power down some compute units, suspending execution
of associated occupant workgroups, if the battery level is low.
Our assessment, informed by discussions with a number of indus-
trial practitioners who have been involved in the OpenCL and/or
HSA standardisation efforts (including [9, 22]), is that GPU ven-
dors (1) will not commit to the occupancy-bound execution model
they currently implement, for the above reasons, yet (2) will not
guarantee fair scheduling using preemption. This is due to the high
runtime cost of preempting workgroups, which requires managing
thread local state (e.g. registers, program location) for all workgroup
threads (up to 1024 on Nvidia GPUs), as well as shared memory,
the workgroup local cache (up to 64 KB on Nvidia GPUs). Vendors
instead wish to retain the essence of the simple occupancy-bound
model, supporting preemption only in key special cases.
For example, preemption is supported by Nvidia’s Pascal archi-
tecture [17], but on a GTX Titan X (Pascal) we still observe star-
vation: a global barrier executes successfully with 56 workgroups,
but deadlocks with 57 workgroups, indicating unfair scheduling.
Our Proposal: Cooperative Kernels. To summarise: blocking al-
gorithms demand fair scheduling, but for good reasons GPU ven-
dors will not commit to the guarantees of the occupancy-bound
execution model. We propose cooperative kernels, an extension to
the GPU programming model that aims to resolve this impasse.
A kernel that requires fair scheduling is identified as cooperative,
and written using two additional language primitives, offer_kill and
request_fork, placed by the programmer. Where the cooperative
kernel could proceed with fewer workgr