GhOST: a GPU Out-of-Order Scheduling Technique
for Stall Reduction
Ishita Chaturvedi1, Bhargav Reddy Godala1, Yucan Wu1, Ziyang Xu1,
Konstantinos Iliakis2, Panagiotis-Eleftherios Eleftherakis2, Sotirios Xydis2, Dimitrios Soudris2,
Tyler Sorensen3, Simone Campanoni4, Tor M. Aamodt5, David I. August1
1Princeton University, USA, 2National Technical University of Athens, Greece, 3UC Santa Cruz, USA,
4Northwestern University, USA, 5University of British Columbia, Canada
Abstract—Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) use massive
multi-threading coupled with static scheduling to hide instruction
latencies. Despite this, memory instructions pose a challenge
as their latencies vary throughout the application’s execution,
leading to stalls. Out-of-order (OoO) execution has been shown
to effectively mitigate these types of stalls. However, prior OoO
proposals involve costly techniques such as reordering loads and
stores, register renaming, or two-phase execution, amplifying
implementation overhead and consequently creating a substantial
barrier to adoption in GPUs. This paper introduces GhOST,
a minimal yet effective OoO technique for GPUs. Without
expensive components, GhOST can manifest a substantial portion
of the instruction reorderings found in an idealized OoO GPU.
GhOST leverages the decode stage’s existing pool of decoded
instructions and the existing issue stage’s information about in-
structions in the pipeline to select instructions for OoO execution
with little additional hardware. A comprehensive evaluation of
GhOST and the prior state-of-the-art OoO technique across a
range of diverse GPU benchmarks yields two surprising insights:
(1) Prior works utilized Nvidia’s intermediate representation
PTX for evaluation; however, the optimized static instruction
scheduling of the final binary form negates many purported
improvements from OoO execution; and (2) The prior state-
of-the-art OoO technique results in an average slowdown across
this set of benchmarks. In contrast, GhOST achieves a 36%
maximum and 6.9% geometric mean speedup on GPU binaries
with only a 0.007% area increase, surpassing previous techniques
without slowing down any of the measured benchmarks.
Index Terms—GPU, Parallelism, out-of-order execution, GPU
Microarchitecture, low overhead out-of-order execution
I. INTRODUCTION
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have significantly en-
hanced the efficiency of computationally intensive applica-
tions, including medical imaging [55], machine learning [30],
and computer vision [48], achieving orders of magnitude im-
provement. This efficiency is attributed to the GPUs’ capability
to (1) support a massively parallel programming model and (2)
reduce latency through concurrency, allowing rapid switching
between concurrent warps. Some Nvidia devices, for instance,
can handle up to 64 warps per core [41], [61], [62].
Despite these capabilities, many GPU applications still
encounter significant stall cycles [2], [31], during which none
of the warps can issue instructions due to data, control, or
structural hazards. Many techniques to address GPU stall
cycles focus on thread-level parallelism. Previous techniques
0
10
20
30
40
% Instuctions issued OoO
Idealized OoO
Efficient OoO
(GhOST)
Fig. 1.
Percentage of reordered instructions with idealized OoO execution
(perfect branch prediction, register renaming and load-store queues) and
efficient OoO execution which elides these techniques.
have typically focused on two approaches: The first involves
increasing the number of warps to improve the probability
of finding a non-stalled warp. However, prior work has shown
that doing so may result in worse performance due to increased
resource contention [25], [34], [53]. The second approach
has been to re-prioritize warps to enhance TLP and/or cache
locality [12], [23], [33], [40], [53], [63]. However, all tech-
niques focusing on TLP are limited, in part, because they only
consider the next in-order instruction per warp. Consequently,
the GPU core will stall when the oldest instructions for all
warps encounter stalls.
Recent efforts have employed out-of-order (OoO) execu-
tion, a technique successfully applied to CPUs, to enhance
instruction-level parallelism on GPUs [16], [19], [20], [28],
[66]. While OoO GPU approaches show promising initial
results, they still suffer from inefficiencies, including re-
issuing instructions, saving state resources such as registers
or memory for more complicated warp switches, and making
ISA modifications. Like GhOST, SOCGPU [19] is an inex-
pensive OoO mechanism for GPUs. Developed coincidentally,
it further validates this paper’s goals. While SOCGPU is
implemented mostly in the front-end like GhOST, it has the
constraint that an instruction cannot be removed from the
instruction buffer until it is written back. This has the potential
to fill the instruction buffer and create a type of stall not found
in GhOST. This could explain why SOCGPU experiences
slowdowns while GhOST does not. Thus, another important
contribution of this paper is in demonstrating that a write-back
constraint is unnecessary and should be avoided. LOOG [20] is
the prior state-of-the-art that enables complete OoO execution
for GPUs. However, LOOG requires expensive features like
load-store queues for reordering memory instructions, result
broadcasting, and register renaming.
1
While previous approaches aim to enable CPU-style out-of-
order (OoO) mechanisms on GPUs, GPU applications exhibit
markedly different characteristics (see Section II). Historically,
the first dynamically scheduled processor, the CDC6600 [60],
enabled OoO execution without renaming or speculation back
when resources were far more constrained than today. We
see merit in revisiting such simpler, yet not fully-featured,
designs in the context of today’s throughput architectures
where efficiency is paramount.
We observed that having instructions from independent
warps in the instruction buffer (IB) provides a high level of
flexibility, leading to significant out-of-order (OoO) perfor-
mance without the need for register renaming, bookkeeping, or
speculation. Figure 1 demonstrates that GPUs offer significant
reordering opportunities to hide stalled instructions without
requiring speculation, register renaming, and reordering of
load and store instructions. These results were obtained across
a comprehensive benchmark suite (see Section V) and mea-
suring how many instructions could be reordered in an fully
featured OoO configuration as well as our simpler, and more
efficient, implementation (GhOST).
Building on this insight, this paper introduces GhOST: a
low-overhead, hardware-only OoO technique for GPUs de-
signed to leverage the unique characteristics of GPU architec-
ture to achieve minimal hardware overhead. GhOST is the first
work that utilizes the issue buffer as a large pool of instruc-
tions, thereby increasing the probability for GhOST to find a
ready instruction without the need for the expensive techniques
required by prior work. GhOST splits the instruction scheduler
between the GhOST scheduler and the warp scheduler, leaving
the complexity of the warp scheduler unmodified. This results
in a simple and effective non-speculative OoO engine, which
resides almost entirely in the decode stage.
GhOST outperforms LOOG [20], the prior state-of-the-
art OoO technique while using significantly less area and
power. GhOST achieves a maximum speedup of up to 37%,
with a geometric mean speedup of 6.9% across 28 applica-
tions, demonstrating notable performance improvement in low-
occupancy applications. GhOST does not cause performance
degradation in any evaluated workload. Furthermore, GhOST
has an extremely efficient implementation, requiring only an
area increase of 0.007% and a 1.1707 mW increase in power.
While GhOST is a hardware-only technique, we show that
compiler techniques like loop unrolling and software renaming
work well with GhOST, bringing the OoO performance closer
to idealized 