A Simulator and Compiler Framework for Agile
Hardware-Software Co-design Evaluation and Exploration
Invited Talk
Tyler Sorensen
UC Santa Cruz
Aninda Manocha
Princeton University
Esin Tureci
Princeton University
Marcelo Orenes-Vera
Princeton University
Juan L. Aragón
Universidad de Murcia
Margaret Martonosi
Princeton University
ABSTRACT
As Moore’s Law has slowed and Dennard Scaling has ended, ar-
chitects are increasingly turning to heterogeneous parallelism and
hardware-software co-design. These trends present new challenges
for simulation-based performance assessments that are central
to early-stage architectural exploration. Simulators must be light-
weight to support heterogeneous combinations of general-purpose
cores and specialized processing units. They must also support
agile exploration of hardware-software co-design, i.e. changes in
the programming model, compiler, ISA, and specialized hardware.
To meet these challenges, we describe our compiler and simulator
pair: DEC++ and MosaicSim. Together, they provide a lightweight,
modular simulator for heterogeneous systems, offering accuracy
and agility designed specifically for hardware-software co-design
explorations. The simulator and corresponding compiler were de-
veloped as part of the DECADES project, a multi-team effort to
design and tape out a new heterogeneous architecture. We will
present two case-studies in important data-science applications
where DEC++ and MosaicSim enable straightforward design space
explorations for emerging full-stack systems.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Modeling and simulation; •
Software and its engineering →Compilers.
KEYWORDS
performance modeling, heterogeneous systems, hardware-software
co-design. LLVM simulation
ACM Reference Format:
Tyler Sorensen, Aninda Manocha, Esin Tureci, Marcelo Orenes-Vera, Juan
L. Aragón, and Margaret Martonosi. 2020. A Simulator and Compiler Frame-
work for Agile Hardware-Software Co-design Evaluation and Exploration:
Invited Talk. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided De-
sign (ICCAD ’20), November 2–5, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3400302.3415751
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICCAD ’20, November 2–5, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8026-3/20/11.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3400302.3415751
1
INTRODUCTION
At this point, technologists have all seen the obituaries for Moore’s
Law and Dennard Scaling. Powerful eulogies, in the form of flat-
tening scaling graphs (e.g. see [26]), have been widely shown at
various conferences and events. This death was inevitable as our
communities pushed transistor technologies to their fundamental
limits: transistors now are at the point where they can no longer
get smaller and faster. These trends will be dearly missed, as they
helped describe romantic pop science facts, e.g. a 2019 smart phone
has roughly 100, 000× as much processing power as the computer
on the Apollo 11 spacecraft that first landed on the moon [14].
When these transistor scaling trends existed, computer architects
and programming language (PL) designers could focus on improv-
ing the design (and the programmability) of general-purpose com-
putational units (e.g. CPUs). As transistor technology improved, it
created opportunities for CPU performance improvement through
these designs. However, with the death of transistor scaling trends,
room for improvement by architects and PL researchers now lies
in specialization, i.e. because transistors are not getting faster, we
must think about how they can be used more efficiently. To achieve
this, problem domains are distilled into abstract building blocks, for
which specialized architectures (and PLs) can be designed. Modern
architectures, or Systems On a Chip (SoCs), are mosaics of special-
ized processing units. A microscopic view shows small, specialized
processing units patched together while a macroscopic view gives
the illusion of a unified system performing one complex task, e.g.
taking a picture on a smart phone. Die photo analysis has shown
that over half the area of modern smartphone SoCs comprises pro-
cessing elements that are neither CPUs nor GPUs [28].
Designing the architecture of a heterogeneous system is extremely
difficult. Individual processing units, e.g. ASIC accelerators, semi-
programmable accelerators, data supply components, and general-
purpose processors, now have mature tooling for design. Thus,
a heterogeneous system design has a buffet of processing units
and data supply techniques to choose from; ideally, it employs a
combination such that the system is optimally efficient across its
problem domains, while also respecting resource constraints. De-
signing the programming language for a heterogeneous system is
also extremely challenging. Legacy software should run efficiently
with minimal (preferably no) modifications. Users should be able
to target the system with familiar languages (e.g. Python and C++).
Finally, the system should provide enough flexibility (or reconfig-
urability) to adapt to the latest algorithm, model, or input data.
ICCAD ’20, November 2–5, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
Sorensen and Manocha, et al.
This architectural design space explosion, coupled with ambi-
tious PL goals, necessitates new simulator and compiler tooling for
the research community. Such tooling should support an agile archi-
tecture design, such that different heterogeneous components can
be easily swapped and evaluated. Likewise, the programming model
should be agile, such that new code transformations (both automatic
and manual) can be rapidly implemented and evaluated. Most im-
portantly, the simulator and compiler should have a straightforward
interface for each other, such that hardware-software co-designs
can be developed in an agile way.
Many widely used simulators (e.g. Sniper [8], ZSim [27], gem5 [7])
are designed to simulate homogeneous ISA systems; this design
choice has several significant drawbacks when modeling heteroge-
neous systems: (1) Accelerator integration is not straightforward
as only a limited set of ASIC designs are currently supported; (2)
PL innovations are implemented in an ad-hoc manner, for example,
by invasive modifications in LLVM, and (3) Individual computation
components can have completely different ISAs, e.g. [5].
At the same time, the PL community has largely rallied behind
the LLVM compiler framework [17]. There is mature support for
various frontends, including C/C++ through Clang [1], Python
through Numba [16], and many others [33]. A program written
in a supported frontend is first compiled to LLVM IR bytecode.
The compiler can then apply transformations, including custom
optimizations written for a hardware-software co-design. After
these transformations, the LLVM backend can produce binaries for
a variety of microarchitectures, including X86, ARM, and RISC-V.
Thus, this framework enables software to flexibly target heteroge-
neous hardware and should be leveraged by a lightweight, modular
simulation infrastructure.
1.1
DEC++ and MosaicSim: a New Compiler
and Simulator Infrastructure
This paper describes DEC++ and MosaicSim: a compiler and simu-
lator infrastructure to support agile development of heterogeneous
architectures and corresponding programming models. Together,
they facilitate early-stage evaluations of hardware-software co-
designs by providing interchangeable heterogeneous architecture
component models and a robust compiler framework. Our compiler,
DEC++, leverages the mature LLVM infrastructure. Our innova-
tions are large