One Size Doesn’t Fit All: Quantifying Performance
Portability of Graph Applications on GPUs
Tyler Sorensen
Princeton University, USA
UC Santa Cruz, USA
tyler.sorensen@ucsc.edu
Sreepathi Pai
University of Rochester, USA
sree@cs.rochester.edu
Alastair F. Donaldson
Imperial College London, UK
afd@ic.ac.uk
Abstract—Hand-optimising graph algorithm code for different
GPUs is particularly labour-intensive and error-prone, involving
complex and ill-understood interactions between GPU chips,
applications, and inputs. Although the generation of optimised
variants has been automated through graph algorithm DSL
compilers, these do not yet use an optimisation policy. Instead
they defer to techniques like autotuning, which can produce good
results, but at the expense of portability.
In this work, we propose a methodology to automatically
identify portable optimisation policies that can be tailored (“semi-
specialised”) as needed over a combination of chips, applications
and inputs. Using a graph algorithm DSL compiler that targets
the OpenCL programming model, we demonstrate optimising
graph algorithms to run in a portable fashion across a wide
range of GPU devices for the ﬁrst time. We use this compiler
and its optimisation space as the basis for a large empirical
study across 17 graph applications, 3 diverse graph inputs
and 6 GPUs spanning multiple vendors. We show that existing
automatic approaches for building a portable optimisation policy
fall short on our dataset, providing trivial or biased results.
Thus, we present a new statistical analysis which can characterise
optimisations and quantify performance trade-offs at various
degrees of specialisation.
We use this analysis to quantify the performance trade-
offs as portability is sacriﬁced for specialisation across three
natural dimensions: chip, application, and input. Compared to
not optimising programs at all, a fully portable approach provides
a 1.15× improvement in geometric mean performance, rising to
1.29× when specialised to application and inputs (but not hard-
ware). Furthermore, these semi-specialised optimisations provide
insights into performance-critical features of specialisation. For
example, optimisations specialised by chip reveal subtle, yet
performance-critical, characteristics of various GPUs.
I. INTRODUCTION
Program transformations, e.g. compiler optimisations, in-
ﬂuence the runtime performance of programs but are affected
by the environment in which the program will run, such as
the architecture, the actual program (application), and input.
If these aspects are ﬁxed, then the transformations can be
specialised, usually by autotuning [1]–[7], often resulting in
signiﬁcant performance improvements.
Unfortunately, by design, such specialisation does not trans-
fer to other environments. If the architecture, application, or
even input change, then the performance impact of trans-
formations may also change. In some undesirable cases, a
transformation that caused a speedup for one environment can
cause slowdowns for another. In our work, for example, a read-
modify-write aggregation transformation applied to the sg-cmb
microbenchmark (discussed in Section VIII) shows a speedup
of more than 22× on an AMD GPU, but yields a slowdown
(.88×) on an Nvidia GPU.
Although specialisation is useful, identifying transforma-
tions that lead to portable performance improvements, i.e.
those that yield improvements consistently, can deliver im-
portant insights into similarities (and differences) across envi-
ronments. Additionally, portable transformations can be more
widely deployed, reducing the maintenance demanded by
fragile specialisations. To the best of our knowledge, however,
there is no systematic and automatic methodology that can
identify these portable transformations from a larger set of
compiler transformations. In part, this is not a straightforward
problem: prior work [8]–[10] has shown that even identifying
transformations that yield performance improvements in a
ﬁxed environment can be confounded by chance effects.
Worse, a quest in search of portable transformations may be
quixotic – there may be no such set of portable transformations
due to the diversity of architectures today. In that event,
then, we would like a rigorous methodology that explicitly
delimits the environment in which a particular transformation
is effective. For example, an analysis that can conﬁrm that
transformation T only yields performance improvements on
architecture A is still valuable. Knowledge of such semi-
portable transformations would also immediately enable semi-
specialisation. Specialisation does not have to be an all or
nothing strategy. Transformations can be specialised across
some components of the environment (e.g. the application) if
they are known at the time of transformation, while remaining
unspecialised and portable over others.
What we lack, however, is a methodology to precisely
quantify the performance trade-off associated with speciali-
sation vs. portability. For example, writers of domain-speciﬁc
compilers might wonder whether autotuning (i.e. full special-
isation) is really worth it for their domain. Could they get
away with enabling a set of options “semi-specialised” to
most environments they expect their compilers to generate
code for? Settling a question like this would require rigorously
quantifying the performance gap of such semi-specialisation
over full specialisation.
In this work, we provide a methodology to resolve these
questions for the common case of a (usually domain-speciﬁc)
compiler with a tunable set of transformations, where the
performance of transformations is affected by applications,
their inputs and the architectures they run on.
We subject our methodology to one of the most stringent
experimental evaluations seen in this space. Our domain-
speciﬁc compiler is a recent state-of-the-art compiler for graph
algorithms on GPUs [11]. We use graph algorithms, because
their performance is heavily inﬂuenced in non-trivial ways
by their inputs. The same graph application running on a
road network graph (large diameter, low average degree) and
a social network graph (small diameter, power-law degree
distribution) can experience different bottlenecks on the same
hardware, confounding and throwing off simplistic search
methods for portable transformations. A compiler framework
ensures we can have thorough experimental coverage of all
transformations as compared to evaluations that manually
optimise [12]. By adapting the compiler to generate OpenCL,
we are also able to run the graph algorithms on a diverse set of
GPUs, vastly expanding the discourse over just Nvidia GPUs
used in prior work.
Thus, for the ﬁrst time, we quantify the performance porta-
bility of state-of-the-art graph applications on GPUs. Our work
uses 17 graph applications (Table VII), using 3 classes of
inputs (Table VIII), on 6 GPUs which span 4 vendors (Table I).
These elements are described in more detail in Section VI. The
transformation space considers 95 optimisation combinations
involving load balancing, on-chip synchronisation, and read-
modify-write (RMW) aggregation, discussed in Section V.
These transformations (and our application set) exercise most
features of the OpenCL standard, providing ﬁne-grained evi-
dence for the performance portability (or lack thereof) of this
widely supported standard.
a) Contributions: Our contributions are:
• A large high-quality dataset on the impact of performance
optimisations on graph algorithms running on a very
diverse set of GPUs (Section VI). Compared to prior
work, our study is the ﬁrst to run high-performance graph
algorithms on many non-Nvidia GPUs.
• A methodology that identiﬁes portable optimisations from
this dataset, and also allows us to delineate the scope of
optimisations across architectures, applications and inputs
(Section III). Our strategy avoids common pitfalls such as
identifying trivial or biased optimisations (Section II-C)
by using 