MosaicSim: A Lightweight, Modular Simulator for
Heterogeneous Systems
Opeoluwa Matthews∗
Aninda Manocha∗
Davide Giri†
Marcelo Orenes-Vera∗
Esin Tureci∗
Tyler Sorensen∗‡
Tae Jun Ham§
Juan L. Arag´on¶
Luca P. Carloni†
Margaret Martonosi∗
∗Princeton University
†Columbia University
‡UC Santa Cruz
§Seoul National University
¶University of Murcia
Abstract—As Moore’s Law has slowed and Dennard Scaling
has ended, architects are increasingly turning to heterogeneous
parallelism and domain-speciﬁc hardware-software co-designs.
These trends present new challenges for simulation-based perfor-
mance assessments that are central to early-stage architectural
exploration. Simulators must be lightweight to support rich het-
erogeneous combinations of general purpose cores and specialized
processing units. They must also support agile exploration of
hardware-software co-design, i.e. changes in the programming
model, compiler, ISA, and specialized hardware.
To
meet
these
challenges,
we
introduce
MosaicSim,
a
lightweight, modular simulator for heterogeneous systems, of-
fering accuracy and agility designed speciﬁcally for hardware-
software co-design explorations. By integrating the LLVM
toolchain, MosaicSim enables efﬁcient modeling of instruction
dependencies and ﬂexible additions across the stack. Its modu-
larity also allows the composition and integration of different
hardware components. We ﬁrst demonstrate that MosaicSim
captures architectural bottlenecks in applications, and accurately
models both scaling trends in a multicore setting and accelerator
behavior. We then present two case-studies where MosaicSim
enables straightforward design space explorations for emerging
systems, i.e. data science application acceleration and heteroge-
neous parallel architectures.
Index Terms—heterogeneity, hardware-software co-design, per-
formance modeling, multi-core architectures, accelerators
I. INTRODUCTION
The last decade has seen a trend of increasing parallelism as
a response to the ending of Moore’s Law and Dennard scaling.
Figure 1 presents microprocessor trends over the past few
decades. As computing frequency (red triangles) has plateaued,
the number of logical cores (blue squares) has increased.
The stagnation in raw computing frequency has also triggered
the usage of specialized systems, including heterogeneous
architectures and hardware-software co-design, to meet the
demands of today’s aggressive performance and power goals.
Designers of modern systems are therefore employing combi-
nations of distinct computation elements, including small, low-
power cores and high-performing hardware accelerators [1–3].
In their Turing award lecture, Hennessy and Patterson
describe a New Golden Age for Computer Architecture,
where future performance improvement opportunities encour-
age vertically-integrated system designs [4]. Such systems
require innovation in programming models, compilers, spe-
cialized hardware, and ISAs. Hence, the system design space
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
Number of Logical Cores
Transistors (thousands)
Typical Power, (Watts)
Frequency (MHz) 
Single Thread Perf (SpecInt x 1k)
Fig. 1.
42 years of trend data for microprocessor characteristics, graph
recreated using data from [7]
has seen a Cambrian explosion in diversity at all levels of the
stack, necessitating ﬂexible tools for design space exploration.
Well-known simulators, e.g. gem5 [5], offer detailed simu-
lation infrastructures for conventional microarchitectures, but
make it difﬁcult for a designer to explore changes across other
layers of the stack, which have increasing inﬂuence in the per-
formance of systems today. Other approaches resort to high-
level simulation (e.g. 1-IPC models or interval simulation [6])
that do not accurately capture critical memory bottlenecks of
many modern data-intensive applications.
We present MosaicSim, a simulation approach that allows
for the exploration of optimizations across the hardware-
software stack, while providing accurate modeling of perfor-
mance bottlenecks and application characteristics. To achieve
these goals, we leverage the LLVM framework [8], which
allows us to utilize a mature compiler infrastructure to capture
instruction dependencies and collect memory traces. Mosaic-
Sim executes LLVM IR, which enables ISA-agnostic sim-
ulation and supports ﬂexible programming models through
compiler passes and specialized instructions. MosaicSim then
simulates the LLVM IR instructions on modular tile models,
which enables straightforward design space exploration of
heterogeneous systems. Furthermore, tile modules support
a ﬂexible communication model, which allows data-supply
hardware-software co-designs to be evaluated.
. . .
Interleaver
LLC
DRAM
Type
Tile
0
1
2
N
OoO core
Accelerator
InO core
...
Object Pointer
...
...
...
TILE0_PTR
OoO
core
.
Accel.
L1
Accel.
OoO
core
.
L1
OoO
core
.
L1
Accel.
InO
core
.
L1
InO
core
.
L1
Interleaver Tile Map
. . .
  
progress( ){
    calculate_delay (node);
    push_call (trans); 
  }
for (t in tiles){
  step += t.progress();
  trans = t.pop_call();
  cycle++ ;}
TILE 0
DDG context
TILES
. . .
OoO
core
.
L1
Fig. 2. MosaicSim integrates different modules (e.g. CPUs and accelerators)
via the Interleaver, which combines module behaviors into system-wide
performance estimates.
To summarize, MosaicSim is a lightweight, modular sim-
ulator for heterogeneous and hardware-software co-design
systems. Its main contributions are:
• Enabling ﬂexible programming models, compiler tech-
niques and ISAs through integration with LLVM.
• Abstract tile models, which capture key performance
microarchitectural details for a variety of core models
and accelerators.
• A holistic simulation approach that allows for the com-
position of different hardware tiles and communication
structures, allowing for the simulation of complex het-
erogeneous systems.
We evaluate MosaicSim and demonstrate that it:
• Accurately captures trends on existing parallel architec-
tures and accelerators (Section VI).
• Is able to simulate complex heterogeneous systems, illus-
trated through three case studies (Section VII).
II. MOSAICSIM OVERVIEW
This section describes an overview of the MosaicSim sim-
ulation methodology. At a high level, MosaicSim provides
tile-based models of different hardware units, including cores,
accelerators, and caches, with an Interleaver that composes
their behaviors to provide total system estimates.
Tiled System Model: Figure 2 displays the tiled system
model in MosaicSim. The overall design represents an SoC
comprised of CPU and accelerator tiles. Each tile in the
SoC has a model of its events that contribute to the perfor-
mance and power of the entire system, and the Interleaver
coordinates the interactions of events from different tiles.
MosaicSim simulates a simple homogeneous chip multipro-
cessor by instantiating several CPU tiles and allowing the
Interleaver to coordinate their interactions, e.g. coordinating
shared memory hierarchy behavior. Additionally, MosaicSim
can simulate more heterogeneous processors by providing (and
hence, interleaving) more diverse models. As a design process
evolves, accelerators or other specialized hardware can be in-
corporated as Section IV describes. The direct linkage with an
LLVM-based compiler allows straightforward decomposition
into models for different units.
As an early-stage tool that targets design space exploration
for hardware-software co-design, MosaicSim focuses on ker-
nel simulation. This allows for modeling compute or memory
bottlenecks in order to provide hardware designers with the
necessary insight to make design decisions (e.g. employing
accelerators) accordingly. MosaicSim is not restricted to kernel
modeling and can simulate arbitrary codes as long as LLVM-
IR can be obtained. However, full application simulation
requires performance models that are often only available in
later design stages, e.g. ﬁlesystem I/O and system calls.
T