LeftoverLocals: Listening to LLM Responses Through
Leaked GPU Local Memory
Tyler Sorensen
Trail of Bits
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, California, USA
Heidy Khlaaf
Trail of Bits
New York City, New York, USA
Abstract
This paper describes LeftoverLocals: a vulnerability that al-
lows data recovery from GPU memory created by another
process on Apple, Qualcomm, and AMD GPUs. Leftover-
Locals impacts the security posture of GPU applications,
with particular significance to LLMs and ML models that
run on impacted GPUs. By recovering local memory – an
optimized GPU memory region – we built a PoC where an at-
tacker can listen into another user’s interactive LLM session
(e.g., llama.cpp) across process or container boundaries.
1
Introduction
This paper is essentially a direct port (by the authors) from the
official Trail of bits blog post, which can be found here: https://
blog.trailofbits.com/2024/01/16/leftoverlocals-listening-to-llm-
responses-through-leaked-gpu-local-memory/. This document
was created because an archived paper may be better suited
for distribution and citation in some cases.
Given the rise of ML applications, especially for privacy
sensitive application domains, it is imperative to rigorously
examine security properties throughout the ML stack. This
includes the computational work horse of ML applications,
the GPU. While NVIDIA GPUs currently appear to domi-
nate the ML market, most other hardware vendors create
their own GPUs, which are becoming more widely used
for ML applications, especially for local computation. This
work discusses a data leak vulnerability found on many of
these GPUs, specifically, from AMD, Apple, Qualcomm and
Imagination. This leak, dubbed LeftoverLocals, was disclosed
earlier this year (CVE-2023-49691) and allows a co-resident
process to read leftover data in an optimized GPU memory
region called local memory.
LeftoverLocals can leak approximately 5.5 MB per GPU
invocation on an AMD Radeon RX 7900 XT which, when
running a 7B model on llama.cpp, adds up to 181 MB for
each LLM query. This is enough information to reconstruct
the LLM response with high precision, an example is shown
in Fig. 1. The vulnerability highlights that many parts of
the ML development stack have unknown security risks and
have not been rigorously reviewed by security experts.
Trail of Bits worked with CERT Coordination Center on a
large coordinated disclosure effort involving all major GPU
1https://kb.cert.org/vuls/id/446598
Figure 1. An example of an LLM response that an attacker
was able to reconstruct utilizing LeftoverLocals. The victim
terminal is on the left (black background), and the attacker
terminal is on the right (white backgroun). We can see that
the attacker is able to reconstruct the response with relatively
high fidelity. We believe that the listener could be more
finally tuned to be even more accurate. Details proof-of-
concept attack application, along with the system, can be
found in Sec. 5.
vendors, including: NVIDIA, Apple, AMD, Arm, Intel, Qual-
comm, and Imagination. As of writing (Feb. 1, 2024), the
status of the impacted vendors, Apple, AMD, and Qualcomm
are as follows:
• Apple: Despite multiple efforts to establish contact
through CERT/CC, we only received a response from
Apple on January 13, 2024. We re-tested the vulner-
ability on January 10 where it appears that some de-
vices have been patched, i.e., Apple iPad Air 3rd G
(A12). However, the issue still appears to be present
on the Apple MacBook Air (M2). Furthermore, the
recently released Apple iPhone 15 does not appear to
be impacted as previous versions have been. Apple
has confirmed that the A17 and M3 series processors
contain fixes, but we have not been notified of the
specific patches deployed across their devices.
• AMD: We have confirmed with AMD that their de-
vices remain impacted, although they continue to in-
vestigate potential mitigation plans. Their statement
on the issue can be read here2.
• Qualcomm: We received notice that there is a patch
to Qualcomm firmware v2.073 that addresses Leftover-
Locals for some devices. However, there may still be
2https://www.amd.com/en/resources/product-security/bulletin/amd-sb-
6010.html
3https://lore.kernel.org/linux-firmware/20240111114032.126035-1-
quic_akhilpo@quicinc.com/
arXiv:2401.16603v1  [cs.CR]  29 Jan 2024
Tyler Sorensen and Heidy Khlaaf
other devices impacted at this time. A Qualcomm rep-
resentative has provided the following comment: “De-
veloping technologies that endeavor to support robust
security and privacy is a priority for Qualcomm Tech-
nologies. We commend Dr. Tyler Sorensen and Dr.
Heidy Khlaaf from the AI/ML Assurance group at
Trail of Bits for using coordinated disclosure practices
and are in the process of providing security updates
to our customers. We encourage end users to apply
security updates as they become available from their
device makers.”
• Imagination: Despite not observing LeftoverLocals
ourselves across the Imagination GPUs that we tested
(see Sec. 6), Google has confirmed that some Imagina-
tion GPUs are indeed impacted. Imagination released
a fix in their latest DDK release, 23.3, made available
to customers in December 20234.
A list of tested and impacted devices can be found in Sec. 6
Other vendors have provided us the following details:
• NVIDIA: confirmed that their devices are not cur-
rently impacted. One reason for this could be that
researchers have explored various memory leaks on
NVIDIA GPUs previously, e.g., in [6], and thus, they
are aware of these types of issues.
• ARM: also confirmed that their devices are not cur-
rently impacted.
We did not hear a response from the remaining vendor,
Intel, we however, we tested two GPUs from them and did
not observe that they were impacted (see Sec. 6).
2
Exploit Brief
GPUs were initially developed to accelerate graphics com-
putations. In this domain, performance is critical, and pre-
viously uncovered security issues have generally not had
any significant consequences on applications. Historically,
this entailed that GPU hardware and software stacks iterated
rapidly, with frequent major architecture and programming
model changes. This has led to complex system stacks and
vague specifications. For example, while CPU ISAs have vol-
umes of documentation, NVIDIA simply provides a few short
tables5. This type of vague specification has led to alarming
issues, both previously [1] and currently, as LeftoverLocals
exemplifies.
2.1
Exploitation requirements
This is a co-resident exploit, meaning that a threat actor’s
avenue of attack could be implemented as another applica-
tion, app, or user on a shared machine. The attacker only
requires the ability to run GPU compute applications, e.g.,
through OpenCL, Vulkan, or Metal. These frameworks are
4https://www.imaginationtech.com/gpu-driver-vulnerabilities/
5https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-binary-utilities/index.html#
instruction-set-reference
well-supported and typically do not require escalated privi-
leges. Using these, the attacker can read data that the victim
has left in the GPU local memory simply by writing a GPU
kernel that dumps uninitialized local memory. These attack
programs, as our code demonstrates, can be less than 10
lines of code. Implementing these attacks is thus not difficult
and is accessible to amateur programmers (at least in obtain-
ing stolen data). We note that it appears that browser GPU
frameworks (e.g., WebGPU) are not currently impacted, as
they insert dynamic memory checks into GPU kernels.
Unless the user inspects the application’s low-level GPU
source-code, it is not possible for them to uncover if their
application is utilizing GPU local memory; this matter is
further complicated as the GPU code is often hidden deep in
library calls, at low levels of deep software stacks (e.g., for
ML). Overall, there are very limited ways to observe that an
attacker is currently stealing data, or has stolen data. This
attack hinges on th