2025 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC)
miniGiraffe: A Pangenomic Mapping Proxy App
Jessica I. Dagostini∗, Joseph B. Manzano†, Tyler Sorensen‡∗and Scott Beamer∗
{jessica.dagostini, tyler.sorensen, sbeamer}@ucsc.edu, joseph.manzano@pnnl.gov
∗University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA
†Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington
‡Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington
Abstract—Large, real-world scientific applications are often
complex, making them difficult to analyze, characterize, and
optimize. Such applications typically involve intricate I/O
patterns and library dependencies, which can make workflow
analysis and tuning difficult. Proxy applications offer a prac-
tical solution by emulating the essential characteristics of the
original application while significantly reducing complexity.
In this work, we present miniGiraffe, a proxy application
for Giraffe, a sophisticated genomics tool that operates over
a pangenome, a graph-based structure capturing genetic
variation across a species. We develop miniGiraffe using a
principled methodology: carefully characterizing Giraffe’s
behavior and validating that our proxy faithfully reproduces
its key computational features. miniGiraffe contains only 2%
of Giraffe’s codebase, while producing identical outputs for
the most computationally intensive code components and
closely matches Giraffe’s execution time and scaling behavior
in these regions. The simplified design of miniGiraffe enabled
rapid experimentation across multiple architectures, which we
utilize to perform an autotuning experiment of the mapping
workflow; we found that specializing parameters to inputs and
architectures provided a geometric mean speedup of 1.15×
and up to a 3.32× speedup over the default parameters.
Index Terms—proxy applications, pangenomes, genomics,
mapping
I. Introduction
Genomics applications are increasingly utilizing large-scale
compute platforms as data availability and computing power
is increasing. This is especially true for recent genomics
innovations, such as the pangenome, which enables the
simultaneous analysis of multiple genomes. These applications
are often computationally intensive, I/O-heavy, and built on
complex software stacks, making them difficult to analyze,
characterize, and optimize. Proxy applications offer a practical
way to address this complexity by replicating the core
behavior of the original application in a more lightweight
and tractable form.
As the size and complexity of pangenomes grow, so do
the computational demands of applications that operate on
them. This is especially true for the human pangenome,
which accurately captures critical genetic variations; its first
draft was only released in 2021 [20]. Mapping against such
complex reference structures can be extremely resource-
intensive—depending on the software used, and pangenome
mapping can take over 40 hours on large compute nodes
even for relatively small datasets [31]. Given the scientific and
medical importance of pangenomes, along with the novelty
of their computational methods, we believe they present an
TABLE I
Comparing Giraffe vs. miniGiraffe code
Giraffe
miniGiraffe
∼50k lines of code
∼1k lines of code
∼350 source-files
2 source files
∼50 library dependencies
3 library dependencies
especially compelling opportunity for optimization by the
computational research community.
a) The Complexities of Scientific Applications: As is the
case with many scientific applications, pangenome mapping
applications are complex, consisting of large code bases
with many library dependencies. Even profiling the code
to determine performance-critical regions is difficult, let alone
developing and evaluating optimizations.
To manage this complexity, proxy applications (often re-
ferred to as proxies or miniapps) are commonly employed.
These are simplified versions of full applications that retain
key characteristics such as computational kernels, memory
behavior, or communication patterns; and as such, these
proxies can be used to understand system behavior and, in
turn, develop optimization strategies [1]. For example, proxies
have been used to improve the energy efficiency of large
physics simulations [34] and to evaluate different program-
ming models in shock hydrodynamics applications [14].
While benchmark suites for bioinformatics exist [2], these
simplified kernels do not capture the complexity of large,
real-world applications, such as pangenome mapping. As
such, insights from these benchmarks may not map back
to the large application. To the best of our knowledge, no
proxy application for this emerging pangenome computation
currently exists, which is precisely this work’s contribution.
b) Shrinking a Giraffe: The complex pangenome mapping
application we consider is Giraffe [31]. This application
uses variation graphs [8], a bioinformatics data structure to
represent linear genome data and their respective variations.
Giraffe is part of the larger toolkit VG, which contains
several other applications that utilize variation graphs, and
its mappings perform many traversals over the graph. These
tools all have complex inter-dependencies, making focused
analysis and optimization difficult.
This work presents miniGiraffe, a proxy application for
Giraffe. The development of this proxy began with a detailed
performance analysis of the original application to identify the
1
most critical functions, i.e., functions in the mapping procedure
that take the most amount of time. To do this, we combined
standard profiling tools with custom instrumentation. We
identified critical functions that, on average, accounted for
32% of the total runtime across a diverse set of datasets. Our
proxy app, miniGiraffe, was built to encapsulate these critical
functions, with I/O obtained by capturing the I/O to those
critical functions in Giraffe.
We validate miniGiraffe both functionally and in terms of
computational characteristics. Functionally, we demonstrate
miniGiraffe outputs exactly the same results as Giraffe.
For computational characteristics, we collect a series of
performance data, including overall runtime, parallel scaling,
and hardware performance counters, and show a close
correspondence to Giraffe. Specifically, we show that the
execution time of our proxy is within 8.7% of the execution
time of Giraffe’s critical functions.
c) Tiny but Mighty: A key component of a proxy is
its simplicity compared to the original application (Table I).
miniGiraffe has only 1K lines of code (LoC) across two source
files compared to the 50K LoC across 350 source files in
the original application. Furthermore, miniGiraffe uses only
three external libraries, while the original uses around 50.
As a result, miniGiraffe is substantially more straightforward
to compile, requiring a few lines in a Makefile, while the
original application contains a labyrinth of Makefiles and
dependencies.
Utilizing these simplifications, it becomes feasible to explore
the behavior of the application across different architectures
and find optimizations. In Section VII, we show the results
of running miniGiraffe across four different systems and the
impact their hardware characteristics have on performance.
Furthermore, we also explored other performance parameters,
such as parallel scheduling policies, batch size, and software
caching capacity. miniGiraffe enables exhaustive exploration
of these parameters, and the results show that specialized
parameters (i.e., through auto-tuning) is able to achieve up to
a 3.32× speedup and a geometric mean speedup of 1.15×.
d) Contributions: In summary, our contributions are:
• A workload characterization of the Giraffe pangenome
mapping tool (Section IV).
• miniGiraffe, a proxy which captures the key computa-
tional components of Giraffe (Section V).
• An evaluation of miniGiraffe across different systems
with different hardware configurations (Section VII).
• Auto tuning performance parameters a