226
Foundations of Empirical Memory Consistency Testing
JAKE KIRKHAM, Princeton University, USA
TYLER SORENSEN, UC Santa Cruz, USA
ESIN TURECI, Princeton University, USA
MARGARET MARTONOSI, Princeton University, USA
Modern memory consistency models are complex, and it is difficult to reason about the relaxed behaviors that
current systems allow. Programming languages, such as C and OpenCL, offer a memory model interface that
developers can use to safely write concurrent applications. This abstraction provides functional portability
across any platform that implements the interface, regardless of differences in the underlying systems. This
powerful abstraction hinges on the ability of the system to correctly implement the interface. Many techniques
for memory consistency model validation use empirical testing, which has been effective at uncovering
undocumented behaviors and even finding bugs in trusted compilation schemes. Memory model testing
consists of small concurrent unit tests called “litmus tests”. In these tests, certain observations, including
potential bugs, are exceedingly rare, as they may only be triggered by precise interleaving of system steps
in a complex processor, which is probabilistic in nature. Thus, each test must be run many times in order to
provide a high level of confidence in its coverage.
In this work, we rigorously investigate empirical memory model testing. In particular, we propose method-
ologies for navigating complex stressing routines and analyzing large numbers of testing observations. Using
these insights, we can more efficiently tune stressing parameters, which can lead to higher confidence results
at a faster rate. We emphasize the need for such approaches by performing a meta-study of prior work, which
reveals results with low reproducibility and inefficient use of testing time.
Our investigation is presented alongside empirical data. We believe that OpenCL targeting GPUs is a
pragmatic choice in this domain as there exists a variety of different platforms to test, from large HPC servers
to power-efficient edge devices. The tests presented in the work span 3 GPUs from 3 different vendors. We
show that our methodologies are applicable across the GPUs, despite significant variances in the results.
Concretely, our results show: lossless speedups of more than 5× in tuning using data peeking; a definition of
portable stressing parameters which loses only 12% efficiency when generalized across our domain; a priority
order of litmus tests for tuning. We stress test a conformance test suite for the OpenCL 2.0 memory model
and discover a bug in Intel’s compiler. Our methods are evaluated on the other two GPUs using mutation
testing. We end with recommendations for official memory model conformance tests.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Graphics processors; • Software and its engineering →
Software testing and debugging.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: memory consistency, autotuning, conformance testing, GPUs, OpenCL
ACM Reference Format:
Jake Kirkham, Tyler Sorensen, Esin Tureci, and Margaret Martonosi. 2020. Foundations of Empirical Memory
Consistency Testing. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4, OOPSLA, Article 226 (November 2020), 29 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3428294
Authors’ addresses: Jake Kirkham, jak4@alumni.princeton.edu, Princeton University, USA; Tyler Sorensen, tyler.sorensen@
ucsc.edu, UC Santa Cruz, USA; Esin Tureci, esin.tureci@princeton.edu, Princeton University, USA; Margaret Martonosi,
mrm@cs.princeton.edu, Princeton University, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
contact the owner/author(s).
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
2475-1421/2020/11-ART226
https://doi.org/10.1145/3428294
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 4, No. OOPSLA, Article 226. Publication date: November 2020.
226:2
Jake Kirkham, Tyler Sorensen, Esin Tureci, and Margaret Martonosi
1
INTRODUCTION
With the end of Dennard scaling, computational gains are increasingly achieved through parallelism
and specialization. However, efficient many-core systems remain difficult to design and implement
correctly. A crucial component of such systems is the memory consistency model, which specifies
memory-ordering constraints in shared memory concurrent programs. These constraints are
specified at the programming language and must be honored throughout the various layers of the
modern system stack. For example, compilers must take the memory model into account when
performing optimizations, and microarchitectural implementations must ensure certain orderings
when propagating values through deep and distributed shared memory hierarchies. A bug in any
one of these complex systems could be critical: e.g. memory propagating out-of-order is akin to a
race-condition, which have been the cause of power failures [United States Department of Energy
2004] and medical equipment malfunctions [Leveson and Turner 1993].
The strongest memory model, i.e. the model that allows the fewest behaviors, is known as se-
quential consistency [Lamport 1979]. It states that a concurrent program execution must correspond
to a sequential interleaving of thread instructions. However, most modern systems (languages
and architectures) have adopted relaxed memory models, in which there are legal program exe-
cutions that do not correspond to an interleaving. Such behaviors, known as relaxed behaviors,
are allowed to accommodate various optimizations, from compiler transformations to hardware
store buffers. Taking into account the nuanced (and sometimes counter-intuitive) nature of relaxed
models, there are ample opportunities for bugs to be introduced throughout the system stack.
Indeed, prior work has identified memory-model related errors in applications [Alglave et al. 2015],
compilers [Manerkar et al. 2016], and hardware implementations [ARM 2011].
Many modern high-performance programming languages, e.g. C/++ and OpenCL, specify a rela-
tional relaxed memory model, described using a dynamic, partially ordered happens-before relation
between annotated memory operations. The key validation task now is providing confidence that
programming language implementations, i.e. the compiler and resulting machine code execution,
matches the programming language specification. State-of-the-art techniques in this area typically
fall into two categories: formal proof and empirical testing.
Formal Proofs. Ideally, validation of an implementation would be through formal proof, which
would show that an implementation honors a specification given any legal program. There has
been much work on performing such proofs for memory consistency models, however, due to the
complexity of the models and implementations, proofs are largely contained to one layer of the
system stack and are performed manually, e.g. using interactive theorem provers. For example,
the C++ programming language has proven compiler mappings to the following ISAs: x86 [Batty
et al. 2011], PowerPC, and ARM [Batty et al. 2012]. Moving down the system stack, prior work has
proven hardware implementations, however with manual effort [Choi et al. 2017].
While these proofs and methodologies are important, they are not always practical (or even
correct). Compiler proofs must be manually adapted to account for new (or unmodeled) parts
of the languages (e.g. see [Chong et al. 2018; Flur et al. 2017]) and must be safely incorporated
into massive compiler code bases. Hardware proofs at this point have only been applied to small
systems implemented using very specific frameworks. Deployed systems are much larger and
implementation details are proprietary. In the worst (though rare) cases, bugs ha