120
The Semantics of Shared Memory in Intel CPU/FPGA
Systems
DAN IORGA, Imperial College London, UK
ALASTAIR F. DONALDSON, Imperial College London, UK
TYLER SORENSEN, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
JOHN WICKERSON, Imperial College London, UK
Heterogeneous CPU/FPGA devices, in which a CPU and an FPGA can execute together while sharing memory,
are becoming popular in several computing sectors. In this paper, we study the shared-memory semantics
of these devices, with a view to providing a firm foundation for reasoning about the programs that run on
them. Our focus is on Intel platforms that combine an Intel FPGA with a multicore Xeon CPU. We describe the
weak-memory behaviours that are allowed (and observable) on these devices when CPU threads and an FPGA
thread access common memory locations in a fine-grained manner through multiple channels. Some of these
behaviours are familiar from well-studied CPU and GPU concurrency; others are weaker still. We encode
these behaviours in two formal memory models: one operational, one axiomatic. We develop executable
implementations of both models, using the CBMC bounded model-checking tool for our operational model
and the Alloy modelling language for our axiomatic model. Using these, we cross-check our models against
each other via a translator that converts Alloy-generated executions into queries for the CBMC model. We
also validate our models against actual hardware by translating 583 Alloy-generated executions into litmus
tests that we run on CPU/FPGA devices; when doing this, we avoid the prohibitive cost of synthesising a
hardware design per litmus test by creating our own ‘litmus-test processor’ in hardware. We expect that our
models will be useful for low-level programmers, compiler writers, and designers of analysis tools. Indeed, as a
demonstration of the utility of our work, we use our operational model to reason about a producer/consumer
buffer implemented across the CPU and the FPGA. When the buffer uses insufficient synchronisation – a
situation that our model is able to detect – we observe that its performance improves at the cost of occasional
data corruption.
CCS Concepts: • Theory of computation →Operational semantics; Axiomatic semantics; • Computer
systems organization →Heterogeneous (hybrid) systems.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: CPU/FPGA, Core Cache Interface (CCI-P), memory model
ACM Reference Format:
Dan Iorga, Alastair F. Donaldson, Tyler Sorensen, and John Wickerson. 2021. The Semantics of Shared Memory
in Intel CPU/FPGA Systems. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, OOPSLA, Article 120 (October 2021), 28 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3485497
Authors’ addresses: Dan Iorga, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK, d.iorga17@
imperial.ac.uk; Alastair F. Donaldson, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK, alastair.
donaldson@imperial.ac.uk; Tyler Sorensen, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
Santa Cruz, USA, tyler.sorensen@ucsc.edu; John Wickerson, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial
College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK, j.wickerson@imperial.ac.uk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2475-1421/2021/10-ART120
https://doi.org/10.1145/3485497
Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 5, No. OOPSLA, Article 120. Publication date: October 2021.
120:2
Iorga et al.
1
INTRODUCTION
The end of Dennard scaling in the early 2000s led to CPU designers resorting to duplicating
processor cores to make computational gains, exploiting additional transistors that became available
year on year thanks to Moore’s law [Rupp 2015]. Now, with the future of Moore’s law looking
uncertain [Hennessy and Patterson 2019], this homogeneous approach to parallelism is under threat.
System designers and application developers must look to heterogeneous systems, comprising
multiple architecturally distinct computational units, for performance and energy efficiency.
A recent trend in heterogeneous systems is to combine a homogeneous multicore CPU with a
field-programmable gate array (FPGA). These combined CPU/FPGA systems are of special interest
because the FPGA component can be configured to represent one or more processing elements
customised for a particular computationally-intensive sub-task (avoiding the cost of manufacturing
an application-specific integrated circuit), while the overall application can be written to run on
the general-purpose CPU. This combination of CPU and FPGA devices has provided significant
performance gains in several domains, including video processing [Abeydeera et al. 2016], neural
networks [Guo et al. 2018], and image filtering [Dobai and Sekanina 2013].
Until recently, data movement in CPU/FPGA systems has been coarse-grained: large amounts of
data are transferred back and forth between the memory spaces of the FPGA and CPU via special
memcpy-like API calls. However, recent devices – including Intel’s Xeon+FPGA system [Intel 2019;
Oliver et al. 2011], the IBM CAPI [Stuecheli et al. 2015] and the Xilinx Alveo [Xilinx 2018] – offer a
fine-grained shared-memory interface between the CPU and FPGA. This enables synchronisation
idioms where data is exchanged in arbitrary (potentially small) amounts, such as work stealing,
which has been shown to enable significant speedups in difficult-to-accelerate applications [e.g.,
Farooqui et al. 2016; Ramanathan et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2010].
Combined CPU/FPGA systems with fine-grained shared memory have the potential to accelerate
irregular applications in an energy-efficient manner, but present significant programmability
challenges. They inherit the well-known challenges associated with concurrent programming on
homogeneous shared-memory systems, and present new challenges due to complex interactions
between heterogeneous processing elements that each have distinct memory semantics. Fine-
grained CPU/FPGA systems are new, and applications that exploit them are only just emerging, so
we see this as an opportune time to examine their semantics rigorously and lay solid foundations
for compiler writers and low-level application developers.
Modelling memory in CPU/FPGA systems. Our contribution is a detailed formal case study of
the memory semantics of Intel’s latest CPU/FPGA systems. These combine a multicore Xeon
CPU with an Intel FPGA, and allow them to share main memory through Intel’s Core Cache
Interface (CCI-P) [Intel 2019]. We refer to this class of systems as X+F (Xeon+FPGA) throughout.1
To gain an understanding of the variety of complex behaviours that the system can exhibit, we
have studied the available X+F documentation in detail and empirically investigated the memory
semantics of a real system that integrates a Broadwell Xeon CPU with an Arria 10 FPGA.
Based on our investigations, we present a formal semantics for the X+F memory system in
two forms: an operational semantics that describes the X+F memory system using an abstract
machine, and an axiomatic semantics that declaratively characterises the executions permitted
by the memory system independently of any specific implementation. We have mechanised the
operational semantics in C, in a form suitable for analysis with the CBMC model checker [Clarke
et al. 2004]. This allows an engineer to explore the possible behaviours of a given memory model
litmus te