PEAK: A Performance Engineering AI-Assistant for GPU
Kernels Powered by Natural Language Transformations
MUHAMMAD USMAN TARIQ, Stanford University, USA
ABHINAV JANGDA, Microsoft Research Redmond, USA
ANGELICA MOREIRA, Microsoft Research Redmond, USA
MADAN MUSUVATHI, Microsoft Research Redmond, USA
TYLER SORENSEN, Microsoft Research Redmond and University of California Santa Cruz, USA
Advancements in large language models (LLMs) are showing promising impact in software development and
programming assistance. However, these models struggle when operating on low-level backend code. This
challenge is exacerbated in the domain of GPU kernels, where performance-critical details are coupled to
rapidly evolving hardware characteristics and available code examples are sparse.
In this work, we introduce Peak, a Performance Engineering AI-Assistant for GPU Kernels powered by
natural language transformations. Peak utilizes the key insight that iterative code transformations (opti-
mizations) can straightforwardly be written in natural language, and then carried out by LLMs. Thus, these
transformations can be rapidly developed, encoding general portable optimizations, but also easily specialized
to specific GPU devices and even kernels. These natural transformations are supported by a modular and
extensible infrastructure that additionally performs validation and performance evaluation. We demonstrate
the flexibility of Peak by instantiating it for three backends, CUDA, HIP, and HLSL, and create 16 natural
transformations for optimizing matrix multiplication kernels. We show that our resulting implementations are
competitive with vendor libraries when available, and for HLSL (without a library) our implementations match
the hardware documented FLOPS. Peak allows the fine-grained exploration of several research questions
around how LLMs behave in this domain, including characterizing transformations and their errors; and how
performance evolves along optimization sequences. Peak provides an interface that can either be utilized by
performance engineers to improve productivity, or driven completely autonomously (e.g., by an AI agent),
providing a forward-compatible design that can continue to improve with advances in AI capabilities.
1
INTRODUCTION
Advances in large language models (LLMs) have significantly impacted software development,
assisting, or even fully automating, a range of programming tasks [2, 13]. Due to the abundance of
high-level code examples and mature frameworks, LLMs have been most effective in front-end and
application-level domains, while low-level backend programming remains a greater challenge [5].
Nonetheless, given the potential of LLMs to improve productivity and democratize software devel-
opment, extending AI assistance to lower-level code is a promising research direction. GPU kernels
are a natural target: they are notoriously difficult to write and tune, yet have enormous performance
implications, particularly in the context of modern AI workloads. Even modest reduction in kernel
runtime can yield significant gains in cost efficiency and energy consumption, especially at scale.
Despite efforts to provide more accessible GPU programming languages [38, 39], development
of efficient GPU kernels remains a domain reserved for experts, requiring deep understanding of
complex memory and concurrency hierarchies, synchronization models, and architecture-specific
optimizations. Compilers for these programming languages necessarily aim to be general-purpose,
while maximizing performance requires performing optimizations that are specific to the kernel, the
particular hardware backend, and possibly specific sizes of the inputs. Even if specialized compilers
are engineered to optimize to the peak performance for some kernels, the GPU ecosystem evolves
rapidly, with new architectural features required to fully exploit hardware capabilities, making it
Authors’ addresses: Muhammad Usman Tariq, Stanford University, USA; Abhinav Jangda, Microsoft Research Redmond,
USA; Angelica Moreira, Microsoft Research Redmond, USA; Madan Musuvathi, Microsoft Research Redmond, USA; Tyler
Sorensen, Microsoft Research Redmond and University of California Santa Cruz, USA.
2
Muhammad Usman Tariq, Abhinav Jangda, Angelica Moreira, Madan Musuvathi, and Tyler Sorensen
very difficult for these frameworks to keep up. However, performance engineering efforts tend to
follow some structure; if this structure can be captured, especially utilizing new AI capabilities,
then there may be opportunities to impact this domain.
Recognizing this potential, there have been several prior (and ongoing) efforts to generate
optimized GPU kernels using AI, spanning academic work, large tech companies, and startups. For
example, KernelBench [27] and the AI CUDA Engineer [29] explores optimizing CUDA kernels
in PyTorch using LLMs. NVIDIA has demonstrated how LLMs can be used to optimize attention
kernels [8], and several startups appears to be building a product around this use case, e.g., see [33–
35]. While these efforts introduce promising techniques for transforming GPU code, they share a
critical limitation: most adopt an all-or-nothing and opaque approach to automation, with minimal
support for human-AI collaboration, interpretable iterative refinement, or extensible modular
interfaces. This rigidity has led to brittle behavior and unintended side effects, in two cases, the
system made critical mistakes which were not caught by the testing infrastructure [24, 40].
1.1
PEAK: Optimizing GPU Kernels through Natural Language Transformations
This paper presents Peak, a GPU kernel optimization framework, powered by natural language
transformation specifications executed by LLMs, to assist performance engineers. Peak captures
the essence of expert performance-engineering processing with the following components:
Natural Transformations. Performance engineers deploy a set of optimization strategies, each
expressed informally in natural language (either explicitly as documentation or implicitly in their
thinking). Peak’s core contribution is to embrace this concept through natural transformations.
These natural transformations are written in natural language and range from general strategies,
such as "unroll a loop" to precise directives, such as "tile the inner loop over the K dimension," that
are specific to the kernel being optimized. Because natural transformations are simple to write (e.g.,
as compared to formal compiler passes), they can be highly specialized to a specific kernel.
Kernel Context. A kernel context consists of a GPU kernel, host-side code that launches the
kernel, input sizes, and a set of performance tuning parameters. This provides sufficient scope to
perform aggressive optimizations (matching the performance of handwritten libraries for complex
kernels), while also checking correctness and analyzing performance. Natural transformations can
transform one kernel context into a new kernel context using LLMs.
Correctness Validators and Performance Evaluators. GPU kernels are complex, as they are executed
by many threads across a complex hierarchy with features that are often poorly documented; errors
are common, even when programmed by experts, let alone generated by an LLM. Thus, any natural
transformation should be rigorously checked. Thus, Peak provides an interface for correctness
validators to check the functional correctness of a kernel context. The base correctness validator
simply compares kernel output values to a baseline. Moreover, Peak exposes an extensible interface
for adding backend-specific validators, such as the compute sanitizers from NVIDIA. In the case of a
failure, a previous kernel context can be restored; from this, the LLM could simply retry, or fall back
to human-in-the-loop debugging, enabling developers to refine or rephrase natural transformations.
Similar to the correctness validators, the performance evaluators operate on a kernel context.
These