Exposing Errors Related to Weak Memory in GPU Applications
Tyler Sorensen
Imperial College London, UK
t.sorensen15@imperial.ac.uk
Alastair F. Donaldson
Imperial College London, UK
alastair.donaldson@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
We present the systematic design of a testing environment
that uses stressing and fuzzing to reveal errors in GPU appli-
cations that arise due to weak memory effects. We evaluate
our approach on seven GPUs spanning three Nvidia archi-
tectures, across ten CUDA applications that use ﬁne-grained
concurrency. Our results show that applications that rarely or
never exhibit errors related to weak memory when executed
natively can readily exhibit these errors when executed in
our testing environment. Our testing environment also pro-
vides a means to help identify the root causes of such errors,
and automatically suggests how to insert fences that harden
an application against weak memory bugs. To understand
the cost of GPU fences, we benchmark applications with
fences provided by the hardening strategy as well as a more
conservative, sound fencing strategy.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.1.3 [Programming
Techniques]: Concurrent Programming; D.2.5 [Software En-
gineering]: Testing and Debugging
Keywords
GPU, CUDA, Nvidia, weak memory, stress test-
ing, memory fences, synchronisation, concurrency
1.
Introduction
General purpose programming languages for graphics pro-
cessing units (GPUs), e.g. CUDA [38] and OpenCL [24],
allow applications from a wide spectrum of domains to take
advantage of the computational power and energy efﬁciency
offered by these devices (see [45, pp. 8-10] for an overview).
GPU applications are prone to concurrency bugs, which
are notoriously difﬁcult to reproduce and ﬁx due to the sheer
number of possible instruction interleavings. Worse, GPUs
have been shown to implement weak memory models, so that
behaviours beyond those obtained from straightforward inter-
leavings are possible [8], making GPU application debugging
even more challenging.
It has been argued, through hand analysis, that certain
deployed CUDA applications can exhibit weak memory bugs
in theory [8], but we are not aware of any existing practical
method for exposing witnesses to weak memory bugs in
GPU applications, i.e. demonstrating erroneous outcomes
from actually running the application on current GPUs. Our
focus in this work is on investigating (a) whether GPU weak
memory bugs can be provoked when running real-world
applications on state-of-the-art hardware, (b) whether such
bugs can be provoked into occurring frequently (to aid in
testing and debugging), and (c) the performance cost of
adding fences to harden GPU applications against such bugs.
We make three main contributions:
1. We develop a novel testing environment designed to reveal
weak memory behaviours in real-world GPU applications.
This environment uses a sophisticated memory stressing
strategy, inspired by prior work on GPU litmus testing [8],
systematically tuned per chip using results from nearly
half a billion micro-benchmark executions. Applying the
testing environment requires no prior knowledge of the
application under test (Sec. 3).
2. We evaluate our approach on seven GPUs spanning three
Nvidia architectures, across ten application case-studies,
showing that we can provoke errors related to weak mem-
ory and discovering previously unknown weak memory
issues in two applications (Sec. 4). Our experiments show
that two straightforward methods for memory stressing
are not effective at exposing weak memory bugs, while
in contrast our novel test environment (tuned per chip) is
often highly effective.
3. We use our testing environment as a fence placement
mechanism, to help understand the root causes of weak
memory bugs, and to harden applications against such
bugs (Sec. 5); we also benchmark the overhead (in terms
of runtime and energy) associated with inserting fences to
harden applications (Sec. 6).
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for
redistribution. The deﬁnitive version was published in the following publication:
PLDI’16, June 13–17, 2016, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
ACM. 978-1-4503-4261-2/16/06...
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2908080.2908114
100
Table 1: The seven Nvidia GPUs that we study
chip
architecture
short name
released
GTX 980
Maxwell
980
2014
Quadro K5200
Kepler
K5200
2014
GTX Titan
Kepler
Titan
2013
Tesla K20
Kepler
K20
2013
GTX 770
Kepler
770
2013
Tesla C2075
Fermi
C2075
2011
Tesla C2050
Fermi
C2050
2010
Unlike previous works for checking applications under weak
memory (see Sec. 7), our technique does not require a formal
memory model description, and requires no modiﬁcations to
the compiler or scheduler.
We begin with a high-level overview of our approach.
Running example
We use the CUDA code of Fig. 1, ex-
tracted from the dot product case study from [45, ch. A1.2]
which we dub cbe-dot, to illustrate our approach. (Back-
ground on CUDA is provided in Sec. 2.) The application in-
corporates a spinlock, and correctness depends on the source
code ordering between the atomic operations on the lock
(lines 19, 22) and the memory operations in the critical sec-
tion (line 15) being preserved. Reordering these operations
can lead to an incorrect dot product value being computed.
However, no erroneous behaviour is observed when conduct-
ing 1000 executions of the application on a Tesla K20 GPU. A
developer who is not suspicious about weak memory effects
might conclude that the application is correct.
Testing environment
We present in Sec. 3 a testing environ-
ment for provoking weak behaviours in applications across
a range of Nvidia GPUs, given in Tab. 1.1 Under our testing
environment, errors (due to weak memory) appear in 102 out
of 1000 executions of cbe-dot on the K20.
The key part of our testing environment is a memory
stressing strategy that targets a completely disjoint region
of memory from the application data (called a scratchpad)
using extra GPU threads disjoint from the threads that execute
the application (the extra threads are called stressing threads).
Because the stressing threads and memory are disjoint from
application threads and data, the set of possible behaviours a
program can exhibit remains the same.
Using nearly half a billion micro-benchmark executions,
the stressing strategy is tuned per GPU to identify where
to stress within the scratchpad, which instructions to apply
during stressing, and how many memory locations to stress
in parallel. Parameters for these values are selected based
on how many weak behaviours they expose in the micro-
benchmarks. For example, micro-benchmarking shows that
for K20 it is effective to apply stress to two memory locations
in parallel, each aligned at 32-word boundaries.
1 We restrict to Nvidia GPUs because the majority of available applications
that exhibit ﬁne-grained concurrency are written using Nvidia’s CUDA.
1
__global__
2
void dot(int *mutex, float *a, float *b, float *c) {
3
int tid = threadIdx.x + blockIdx.x * blockDim.x;
4
int cacheIndex = threadIdx.x;
5
float temp = 0;
6
7
while (tid < N) {
8
temp += a[tid] * b[tid];
9
tid += blockDim.x * gridDim.x; }
10
11
// local computation code omitted
12
13
if (cacheIndex == 0) {
14
lock(mutex);
15
*c += cache[0];
16
unlock(mutex); }
}
17
18
__device__ void lock(int *mutex) {
19
while (atomicCAS(mutex, 0, 1) != 0 ); }
20
21
__device__ void unlock(int *mutex) {
22
atomicExch(mutex, 0); }
Figure 1: CUDA code for the cbe-dot application
Weak behaviours in applications
We evaluate our testing
environment on ten GPU application case-studies that im-
plement ﬁne-grained concurrency idioms, e.g. mutexes and
concurrent data-structures (Sec. 4). On each of the seven
GPUs of Tab. 1, we executed each application repeatedly for
one hour under our testing environment. For comparison, we
also tested the applications under two more straightforward
stressing environments that are not tuned per chip.
Our results show that our