Redwood: Flexible and Portable Heterogeneous
Tree Traversal Workloads
Yanwen Xu
University of California, Santa Cruz
yxu83@ucsc.edu
Ang Li
Princeton University
angl@princeton.edu
Tyler Sorensen
University of California, Santa Cruz
tysorens@ucsc.edu
Abstract—Shared memory heterogeneous systems are now
mainstream, with nearly every mobile phone and tablet contain-
ing integrated processing units. However, developing applications
for such devices is difficult as workloads must be decomposed
across different processing units, and the decomposition must
be flexible to account for the growing diversity of devices, each
with different relative processing unit throughput. Furthermore,
many devices require distinct programming front ends, requiring
significant effort to write cross-platform applications.
In this work, we identify a pragmatic class of applications,
which we call traverse-compute applications, that are ideal for
shared memory heterogeneous systems. These applications have
a flexible heterogeneous decomposition where CPUs excel at
traversing a tree structure, while accelerators excel at node
computations. Leveraging this insight, we present Redwood: a
framework for writing heterogeneous traverse-compute work-
loads. Redwood provides a simple processing unit abstraction
and a tree traversal library that enables heterogeneous opti-
mizations. Using Redwood, we implement Grove, a benchmark
suite containing nine pragmatic tree traversal applications, e.g.,
k-nearest neighbors. We instantiate Redwood for three different
heterogeneous programming platforms: CUDA, SYCL, and High-
Level Synthesis; we use Grove to evaluate five shared memory
heterogeneous systems. Our evaluation highlights the impor-
tance of flexible heterogeneous decomposition as the optimal
parameters differ widely across platforms and applications.
However, once optimally configured, heterogeneous implemen-
tations can provide up to 13.53× speedups (geomean of 3.01×)
over homogeneous implementations, showcasing the potential of
heterogeneous computing for these workloads.
Index Terms—Heterogeneous Computing, Benchmarks, FP-
GAs, GPUs, Tree Traversals
I. INTRODUCTION
As Moore’s Law and Dennard’s scaling come to an end, the
demand for ever-increasing performance and energy efficiency
has driven the development of Shared-Memory Heterogeneous
Systems (SMHSs), particularly in mobile System-on-Chips
(SoCs), e.g., an Apple A12 SoC has over 80% of the die
area consisting of accelerators [45]. SMHSs incorporate di-
verse specialized processing units (PUs), including traditional
CPUs and Programmable Accelerating PUs (PAPUs), such
as integrated GPUs and embedded FPGAs, all interconnected
through a shared-memory hierarchy on the same chip. In
contrast to conventional accelerator-oriented heterogeneous
systems (e.g., [23], [41]), SMHSs architecture enables efficient
communication and data sharing between different PUs, com-
pared to discrete heterogeneous systems where data is typically
transferred via PCIe, as studied in [12], [19], [33].
In recent years, there has been a growing trend in academia
to explore SMHSs, as shown by the increasing number of
studies focusing on the integration of accelerators and their
interactions with a shared memory hierarchy in SoC de-
signs [22], [27]. Moreover, in [13], [30], [60], these studies
have shown that shared memory is a key factor in improving
Heterogeneous SoCs’ performance and energy efficiency.
Apart from academic explorations, there are many deployed
SMHSs, largely on mobile devices, such as phones and tablets.
Many different vendors produce these devices, e.g. Apple,
Qualcomm, and ARM, each of which contains vendor-specific
PAPU architectures. This diversity necessitates the need for
benchmarks to evaluate and compare the efficiency of these
SMHSs. However, SMHSs remain difficult to target with
workloads that can efficiently utilize their different PUs.
In this work, we identify a pragmatic class of workloads,
which we call traverse-compute, that are ideal for SMHSs.
These workloads aim to harness the capabilities of various PUs
in SMHSs effectively, enabling comprehensive performance
evaluation and comparison across different SoC designs.
A. Heterogeneous Traverse-Compute Workloads
Trees are a fundamental data structure and form the foun-
dation for many useful workloads [18]. A tree traversal is
characterized by irregular memory accesses, as nodes can be
scattered across the memory. Many tree-based workloads com-
bine tree traversal with some computation, largely occurring
when leaf nodes are visited. We call such workloads traverse-
compute workloads, which can often be found in statistical
learning [14], and particle simulations [5].
Traverse-compute workloads utilize spatial partitioning trees
like k-d trees [3], allowing a point cloud to be efficiently
searched in O(log(n)) instead of O(n). An example of
traverse-compute workload is
nearest-neighbor (NN); its
applications include facial recognition on surveillance cam-
eras [39], object detection in robotics [35], and anomaly
detection in portable monitoring systems [50]. These tree-
based approaches offer an attractive energy-compute trade-off,
making them a suitable alternative to DNN-based approaches
for resource-constrained devices [40], [57], where SMHSs are
often employed.
These workloads have been well-studied and can be found in
other benchmarks: e.g., Splash3 [43] and [6] includes Barnes-
Hut algorithms; Hetero-Mark [51] includes k nearst-neighbor.
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
…
…
…
…
…
M
Data Movements Cost 
(Host ↔Device)
M
M
M
M
Tasks 
Components of task that best 
suited to CPU
Components of task that best 
suited to PAPU
CPU
PAPU
CPU
PAPU
CPU
PAPU
CPU
PAPU
CPU
PAPU
(a) Accelerator-
oriented
(b) Flexible Task 
Scheduling
(c) Specialized 
Decomposition
(e) Flexible & 
Specialized
on SMHS    
(d) Flexible &  
Specialized
Execution Timeline
(unutilized PAPU)
(unutilized CPU)
(inefficient use of PUs)
=
Fig. 1.
(a-d) Execution timelines for different heterogeneous workload
paradigms. Blue/Green shading represents tasks, decomposed from the orig-
inal algorithm (Grey), that are best suited to CPU/PAPU, respectively.
Redwood combines flexible task scheduling, specialized decomposition, and
efficient communication between PUs, as illustrated in (e).
However, the traverse-compute abstraction boundary has not
been exploited in the way that we are proposing.
B. Heterogeneous Computing Paradigms
While there are many works on heterogeneous computing,
e.g., see [33], we believe that several factors make this work-
load, along with our corresponding programming framework
and benchmark suite, unique. We start by discussing four
common heterogeneous computing paradigms, illustrated in
Figure 1, and show how traverse-compute workloads have a
flexible and specialized mapping to SMHSs.
a) Accelerator-oriented: In many discrete, accelerator-
oriented systems, the trend is to offload most computation
to the accelerator, as shown in Fig. 1-a. This approach can
result in an underutilized CPU, especially in a SMHS, where
different PUs share a more or equal portion of the system
resources, e.g., as is the case on many smartphone SoCs [45].
Thus, to utilize the entire system, tasks should be decomposed
so that the workload is distributed across PUs.
b) Flexible Task Scheduling: Other frameworks have task
schedulers that assign similar tasks across both the CPU and
GPU, such as work stealing in [10]; this is shown in Fig. 1-
b, where both PUs are occupied. Furthermore, due to task
granularity and dynamic task management, these heteroge-
neous frameworks can adapt to different PAPU throughputs.
Using Nvidia’s SMHS Jetson chips as an example, the Xavier
reports 1.7 GPU TFLOPs, while the Orin reports 5.3 GPU
TFLOPs [38]. Given these differences, a portable heteroge-
neous workload requires a flexible decomposition, i.e., so that
the workload executing on the Orin can be configured to have
more work mapped to the GPU and t