Slow and Steady:
Measuring and Tuning Multicore Interference
Dan Iorga
Imperial College London, UK
d..iorga17@imperial.ac.uk
Tyler Sorensen
UC Santa Cruz, USA
Princeton University, USA
tyler.sorensen@ucsc.edu
John Wickerson
Imperial College London, UK
j.wickerson@imperial.ac.uk
Alastair F. Donaldson
Imperial College London, UK
afd@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract—Now ubiquitous, multicore processors provide repli-
cated compute cores that allow independent programs to run
in parallel. However, shared resources, such as last-level caches,
can cause otherwise-independent programs to interfere with one
another, leading to signiﬁcant and unpredictable effects on their
execution time. Indeed, prior work has shown that specially
crafted enemy programs can cause software systems of interest to
experience orders-of-magnitude slowdowns when both are run in
parallel on a multicore processor. This undermines the suitability
of these processors for tasks that have real-time constraints.
In this work, we explore the design and evaluation of tech-
niques for empirically testing interference using enemy programs,
with an eye towards reliability (how reproducible the interference
results are) and portability (how interference testing can be
effective across chips). We ﬁrst show that different methods
of measurement yield signiﬁcantly different magnitudes of, and
variation in, observed interference effects when applied to an
enemy process that was shown to be particularly effective in
prior work. We propose a method of measurement based on
percentiles and conﬁdence intervals, and show that it provides
both competitive and reproducible observations. The reliability of
our measurements allows us to explore auto-tuning, where enemy
programs are further specialised per architecture. We evaluate
three different tuning approaches (random search, simulated
annealing, and Bayesian optimisation) on ﬁve different multicore
chips, spanning x86 and ARM architectures. To show that our
tuned enemy programs generalise to applications, we evaluate
the slowdowns caused by our approach on the AutoBench and
CoreMark benchmark suites. Our method achieves a statistically
larger slowdown compared to prior work in 35 out of 105
benchmark/chip combinations, with a maximum difference of
3.8×. We envision that empirical approaches, such as ours, will
be valuable for ‘ﬁrst pass’ evaluations when investigating which
multicore processors are suitable for real-time tasks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Multicore processors have become thoroughly mainstream,
and are now routinely used even in safety-critical settings [31].
Yet, in a real-time domain, the greatest asset and deﬁning
feature of multicore architectures – that they allow work
to be distributed among multiple processing cores working
simultaneously – begets a signiﬁcant weakness: interference
between cores.
This interference arises from contention between cores for
shared resources (e.g. caches, buses, and main memory), and
it can have a signiﬁcant and unpredictable effect on the
worst-case execution time (WCET) of programs [24]. This
undermines the suitability of multicore processors in scenarios
that involve real-time constraints.
This paper is concerned with empirical techniques for
estimating upper bounds on how much interference a program
running on a multicore processor could be subjected to.
Although empirical techniques cannot promise to identify the
absolute worst case, they are nonetheless valuable for making
rapid comparisons between candidate processors. The key idea
is to design enemy programs that access shared resources in
just the right way to maximise the contention with a program
running on another core [24], [21], [12]. Prior work has
designed several enemy programs, demonstrating substantial
slowdowns on commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) processors of
more than 300× [3].
The ﬁrst contribution of this paper is a method for reliably
estimating how much interference these enemy programs re-
ally cause. We propose a two-pronged measurement strategy
that directly mitigates against factors that can be controlled
(e.g. frequency throttling and thread migration) and uses
statistical methods to mitigate against factors that are more
difﬁcult to control. We apply our measurement strategy to
enemy programs proposed in prior work, and show that while
there is no doubt that very large slowdowns are possible, it
is difﬁcult to reproduce the same magnitudes of slowdown
once the various potentially-confounding factors are taken into
account.
Thus, armed with a method for reliably measuring multicore
interference, our second contribution is to investigate the
extent to which auto-tuning techniques can be effective at gen-
erating better enemy programs. To this end, we have designed
and implemented an open source tool that automatically tunes
the parameters of a set of ANSI-C enemy programs, aiming to
maximise the interference they cause on shared resources. Our
tool supports three different auto-tuning strategies – random
search, simulated annealing and Bayesian optimisation – and
we compare the effectiveness of each. We have applied our
tool to create enemy programs for ﬁve different chips, listed
in Table I.
We evaluate our approach using benchmarks from the
CoreMark [6] and AutoBench [2] real-time application suites.
Our auto-tuning framework is able to create enemies that cause
slowdowns up to 3.8× larger than the slowdowns caused by
enemies studied in prior work that were hand-tuned by experts.
More generally, our results show that auto-tuning for about
10 hours can lead to statistically signiﬁcant improvements in
TABLE I: Development boards used to evaluate our approach
Name
Short name
SoC
Arch
Cores
Raspberry Pi 3 B
Pi3
BCM2837
Arm A53
4
DragonBoard 410c
410c
Adreno306
Arm A53
4
Intel Joule
570X
570x
Atom
4
Nano-PC T3
T3
S5P6818
Arm A53
8
BananaPi M3
M3
A837
A7
8
observed slowdowns for 35 out of the 105 benchmark/board
combinations that we tried. We attribute the effectiveness
of auto-tuning here to its ability to uncover parameters that
exploit architectural features that are not immediately obvious
and are thus unlikely to be discovered even by experts. A
system developer can use these enemies with instrumentation
and measurement tools (e.g. performance counters), to gain
more insights into the system. An added beneﬁt of our
methodology over expert-tuned enemies is that it is portable:
it can be used to automatically tune effective enemies across
multiple, distinct architectures. We emphasise that auto-tuning
is only enabled once our reliable measurement methodology
is in place. Without this, the slowdowns associated with dif-
ferent enemy program conﬁgurations cannot be meaningfully
compared.
In summary, our main contributions are:
• a set of principles for how enemy programs can be
rigorously evaluated, with emphasis on reproducibility
(Section II),
• an auto-tuning framework that can automatically conﬁg-
ure enemy programs to maximise interference without the
need for expert knowledge (Section III), and
• an experimental study instantiating our auto-tuning
framework with our reliable measurement method and
using it to tune enemy programs that have been proposed
in prior work, obtaining enemies that can be up to
3.8× more effective at provoking interference in real-time
applications (Section IV).
Our tool is open source and available online.1
II. MEASURING INTERFERENCE RELIABLY
We ﬁrst present our approach for measuring the interference
caused by an enemy program in a reliable manner, which
underpins our practical instantiation in Section IV of the auto-
tuning approach that we present in Section III.
As in prior work [24], [3], we are interested in evaluat-
ing commodity hardware using a regular (i.e. non-real-time)
operating system, as this is a realistic usage scenario for
early evaluation of COTS processors. But unlike this prior
work, which pays little-to-no explicit attention to measurement
reliability (i.e. variance and uncontrolled interf