1
GraphAttack: Optimizing Data Supply for Graph
Applications on In-Order Multicore Architectures
ANINDA MANOCHA, Princeton University, USA
TYLER SORENSEN, UC Santa Cruz, USA
ESIN TURECI, Princeton University, USA
OPEOLUWA MATTHEWS, Princeton University, USA
JUAN L. ARAGÓN, Universidad de Murcia, Spain
MARGARET MARTONOSI, Princeton University, USA
Graph structures are a natural representation of important and pervasive data. While graph applications have
significant parallelism, their characteristic pointer indirect loads to neighbor data hinder scalability to large
datasets on multicore systems. A scalable and efficient system must tolerate latency while leveraging data
parallelism across millions of vertices. Modern Out-of-Order (OoO) cores inherently tolerate a fraction of
long latencies, but become clogged when running severely memory-bound applications. Combined with large
power/area footprints, this limits their parallel scaling potential and, consequently, the gains that existing
software frameworks can achieve. Conversely, accelerator and memory hierarchy designs provide performant
hardware specializations, but cannot support diverse application demands.
To address these shortcomings, we present GraphAttack, a hardware-software data supply approach that
accelerates graph applications on in-order multicore architectures. GraphAttack proposes compiler passes to
(1) identify idiomatic long-latency loads and (2) slice programs along these loads into data Producer/Consumer
threads to map onto pairs of parallel cores. Each pair shares a communication queue; the Producer asyn-
chronously issues long-latency loads, whose results are buffered in the queue and used by the Consumer. This
scheme drastically increases memory-level parallelism (MLP) to mitigate latency bottlenecks. In equal-area
comparisons, GraphAttack outperforms OoO cores, do-all parallelism, prefetching, and prior decoupling ap-
proaches, achieving a 2.87× speedup and 8.61× gain in energy efficiency across a range of graph applications.
These improvements scale; GraphAttack achieves a 3× speedup over 64 parallel cores. Lastly, it has pragmatic
design principles; it enhances in-order architectures that are gaining increasing open-source support.
CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization →Multicore architectures; Heterogeneous (hybrid)
systems; Special purpose systems.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: graph analytics, hardware-software co-design, parallelism
ACM Reference Format:
Aninda Manocha, Tyler Sorensen, Esin Tureci, Opeoluwa Matthews, Juan L. Aragón, and Margaret Martonosi.
2021. GraphAttack: Optimizing Data Supply for Graph Applications on In-Order Multicore Architectures.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim. 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2021), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3469846
Authors’ addresses: Aninda Manocha, Princeton University, USA, amanocha@princeton.edu; Tyler Sorensen, UC Santa Cruz,
USA, tyler.sorensen@ucsc.edu; Esin Tureci, Princeton University, USA, esin.tureci@princeton.edu; Opeoluwa Matthews,
Princeton University, USA, luwa.matthews@gmail.com; Juan L. Aragón, Universidad de Murcia, Spain, jlaragon@um.es;
Margaret Martonosi, Princeton University, USA, mrm@princeton.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2021/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3469846
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2021.
1:2
A. Manocha et al.
1
INTRODUCTION
Graphs provide a natural abstraction for relational data and as such, they efficiently capture
key properties of complex and pervasive systems, such as social networks and language models.
Graph algorithms operate over these structures and have applications in many domains, including
recommendation systems, information spread modeling, and disease classification [23, 25, 46, 67]. In
the era of big data, graph applications process datasets that are growing rapidly and the slowdown
of chip frequency and transistor scaling necessitates innovations that span architecture, compiler,
and application design to achieve performance gains.
While significant strides in software/hardware acceleration have been made for other application
domains in the big data era, e.g. DNNs, graph applications have not experienced similar successes.
There are three fundamental problems specific to graph applications that have hindered this process.
(1) Unlike DNNs, graph algorithms do not have repeating blocks of homogeneously parallel, dense
computations. Instead, both computation and parallelization are highly variable depending on both
the problem and the input graph structure [51], which is far from ideal for accelerator design [57].
(2) Any hardware acceleration for graph applications must compete for precious resources, e.g.
area/energy, in a system design. (3) Graph applications are characterized by irregular memory access
patterns that pose a data supply challenge. Each vertex computation typically involves several
pointer indirect accesses and conditional updates to node data. With datasets much larger than
the last-level cache (LLC), these neighbor accesses often miss in the cache, leading to long-latency
DRAM accesses that occupy (or stall) system resources. These accesses are difficult to predict
and have variable dependent computation chains, which confound prefetching, runahead, and
decoupled architecture designs.
A performant and scalable solution for graph processing should have: (1) hardware efficiency, i.e.
high utilization of system resources, and (2) sufficient programmability, i.e. the ability to program
and execute a variety of algorithm implementations. As a final design philosophy, we believe
that solutions must also have (3) an accessible architecture implementation that can feasibly be
integrated into existing open-source hardware design and compiler frameworks. In the golden age
of computer architecture, it is now more possible than ever to realize hardware-software co-designs,
even outside of an established chip design company. Existing solutions (both in software and
hardware) have fallen short of fully meeting these requirements, especially in today’s increasingly
heterogeneous graph application landscape.
Existing Software Solutions for Graph Applications. Software frameworks for graph applications
aim for efficient parallel solutions via shared memory CPUs [52, 66] and GPUs [44, 58]. These
frameworks largely target the data-parallel loops across vertices (and sometimes edges) and aim
to parallelize these loops efficiently in a homogeneous (i.e. same program per thread and single
device) manner, an approach also known as do-all parallelism. They use many threads to perform
irregular accesses simultaneously, exploiting Memory-Level Parallelism (MLP). Many innovations in
these frameworks involve load-balancing, efficient data representation, synchronization reduction,
and dynamic switching between neighbor flow directions (push or pull). While these approaches
show improvements over baseline implementations, they are limited by underutilized hardware.
For CPUs, the target cores are typically commercial OoO processors, which are designed with
latency tolerance mechanisms, e.g. load-store queues (LSQs) and reorder buffers (ROBs). These
components have high area and energy overheads and yet prior work has shown that without
additional hardware augmentation, they struggle with graph analytic kernels due to com